47, XXX (Trisomy X)

synonyms:
47, XXX47, XXX karyotype47, XXX syndrometriple X syndrometriple XXXX syndrome

overview:
47, XXX (Trisomy X) is a disorder that affects females and is characterized by the presence of an additional X chromosome. Normally, females have two X chromosomes, but females with 47, XXX have three X chromosomes. The characteristics (phenotype) associated with this chromosomal disorder varies widely, but most commonly includes language-based learning disabilities, developmental dyspraxia, tall stature, low muscle tone (hypotonia) and abnormal bending or curving of the pinkies toward the ring fingers (clinodactyly). 47, XXX occurs randomly due to errors during the division of reproductive cells in one of the parents. This disorder occurs in one in 900 to 1,000 livebirths.

symptoms:
The severity of symptoms associated with 47, XXX may vary greatly from one person to another, but it is thought that many females are mildly affected or asymptomatic, as about 75% of girls remain undiagnosed for their whole lives (Frith, 2024). It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals should talk to their specialists and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
While this disorder is not associated with any striking physical features, individuals with 47, XXX may have mild facial differences including vertical skin folds that may cover the inner corners of the eyes (epicanthal folds) and widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism). Most also have decreased muscle tone (hypotonia) and the fifth finger may be abnormally bent or curved mildly, which is called clinodactyly. During early childhood, girls with 47, XXX usually exhibit tall stature compared to other girls their age. By adolescence, most are at or above the 75thpercentile for height. In general, these girls are like neurotypical children in their physical appearance but do show neurodevelopmental differences as early as infancy.
47, XXX is often associated with a broad range of neurodevelopmental differences compared to children without 47, XXX. Infants and children with 47, XXX have delays in attaining developmental milestones, especially the acquisition of motor skills, speech skills and social cognition. For example, walking may be delayed due to low muscle tone and older girls may experience poor coordination, clumsiness and deficient motor planning skills secondary to developmental dyspraxia.
Speech and language development is also commonly delayed and first words may not occur until 18 months. Expressive ability is almost always more impaired than receptive skills, though both may be impacted. Girls with 47, XXX have an increased frequency of language-based learning disabilities including reading deficiencies such as dyslexia, reading comprehension deficits and/or reading fluency issues in conjunction with other language-based disabilities. There is a wide range of cognitive abilities in girls with 47, XXX, with most having average to above average non-verbal IQs and below average verbal IQs. This is because of the language-based learning dysfunction that girls with 47, XXX experience. However, these deficits are very responsive to treatment, with early intervention often resulting in a very good outcome.
Though less is known about the psychological symptoms associated with 47, XXX, studies have found an increased incidence of anxiety and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder-inattentive subtype (ADHD). It is believed that their impairments in verbal abilities may exacerbate anxiety in social settings, such as school or social gatherings. This may result in low self-esteem, social avoidance and more behavioral problems. The incidence of ADHD in girls with 47, XXX is reported to be about 25-35%, with symptoms including inattention, poor executive function and distractibility rather than hyperactivity (Pennington et al., 1980; Bender et al., 1993). Again, some girls have minimal to no behavioral or emotional abnormalities while others may need therapeutic services. Early diagnosis is important, and these girls tend to have fewer issues later in life when they are diagnosed prenatally or early and treated appropriately.
For most girls, sexual development and fertility are normal. However, reports indicate that some affected females may have abnormal development of the ovaries (ovarian dysgenesis) and/or the uterus, delayed or early onset of puberty (precocious puberty) and/or fertility problems. There have also been reports of women with 47, XXX developing premature ovarian failure (POF), which is the loss of function of the ovaries before the age where menopause is expected to begin due to a decrease in the production of certain hormones.
Less often, additional abnormalities have been described in individuals with 47, XXX including kidney abnormalities, such as absence of a kidney (unilateral renal agenesis) or malformation (dysplasia) of the kidneys; recurrent urinary tract infections; seizures; constipation; abdominal pain; flatfeet (pes planus); and pectus excavatum, a condition in which the breastbone is mildly depressed into the chest. Heart (cardiac) abnormalities have also been described in some isolated cases.

