47, XXY (Klinefelter Syndrome)

synonyms:
KS47,XXY male

overview:
Summary
47,XXY (Klinefelter syndrome) is a chromosomal variation in males where one extra X chromosome is present which then results in a 47,XXY. The extra X chromosome typically affects physical, neurodevelopmental, behavioral and neurocognitive functioning.
Common physical features may include tall stature, reduced muscle tone, small testes (hypogonadism), delayed pubertal development and lack of secondary male sex characteristics such as decreased facial and body hair. Increased breast growth (gynecomastia) may occur later in puberty without appropriate hormonal treatment care. With proper treatment, gynecomastia typically occurs in less than 10% of boys with 47,XXY (KS).
There is great variability to the neurodevelopmental profile in boys with 47,XXY (KS). Common cognitive and behavioral features may include speech and language delays, anxiety, ADHD (inattentive subtype) and emotional and social functioning challenges without treatment. The features of 47,XXY (KS) are typically associated with decreased testosterone level and elevated gonadotropin levels. Early hormonal treatment (EHT) with three monthly injections of 25 mg. of testosterone enanthate, typically given between 4-12 months of age, may optimize brain development and neurodevelopmental outcomes. Testosterone should be administered along with an evaluation by a pediatric endocrinologist familiar with 47,XXY (KS).
Introduction
Klinefelter syndrome is named after Dr. Henry Klinefelter, who identified the condition in the 1940s.
47,XXY is not rare and occurs 1 in 500 male births, however only about 25% of boys with 47, XXY (KS) are diagnosed and this diagnosis usually occurs in adulthood (Gravholt et al., 2018). Conditions that are variants of KS including mosaic karyotypes such as 46,XY/47,XXY and other conditions such as 48,XXYY, 48,XXXY and 49,XXXXY (poly-X Klinefelter syndromes) are rare.

symptoms:
Most newborn babies with KS have no significant or unusual features.
Most people with KS are identified though prenatal diagnosis or when the child does not progress through puberty completely or adequately.
Signs and symptoms noticeable in infants and young children may include:
Abnormal location of the urinary opening in the penis (hypospadias)Small penis or testesDevelopmental delay (e.g. speech delay)
With a decrease in androgen production, secondary sexual characteristics do not develop completely and the signs and symptoms in teenagers may include:
Delayed pubertySmall testesBreast development (gynecomastia)Lack of voice changesNo male hair patterns (no beard, no hair in the axillary region or genital region, no hair in the chest or legs or arms)Absence of the growth spurt
Many males with KS are not identified until they have low fertility problems as adults. Males with KS may have a relatively increased risk to develop breast cancer but not until after 60 years of age.
Other signs and symptoms may include:
Most males with 47,XXY have normal intelligence, but have an increased risk for language-based learning disorders, dyslexia and mild social and executive functioning challenges.Affected males may have verbal communication delays due to language-based learning disorders and subtle motor planning deficits. Nonverbal capacities in males with 47,XXY such as perceptual reasoning and receptive language skills may be intact or even advanced, thus, PIQ (nonverbal IQ) is often higher than VIQ (verbal IQ) on neurodevelopmental testing.Difficulty perceiving social cues and regulating emotions in stressful situations.Increased risk for endocrine conditions such as type 2 diabetes and its associated complications, osteopenia and osteoporosis, tumors (breast and germ cells), systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis and Sjögren syndrome.

