Aarskog Syndrome

synonyms:
Aarskog diseaseAarskog-Scott syndromeAASfaciodigitogenital syndromefaciogenital dysplasiaFGDYScott Aarskog syndrome

overview:
Aarskog syndrome is a rare genetic condition characterized by short stature and multiple facial, limb and genital abnormalities. Additionally, some types of cognitive disorders may occasionally be present. Up to now, theFGD1gene on the X chromosome is the only gene known to be associated with Aarskog syndrome.

symptoms:
Aarskog syndrome primarily affects males. Affected boys exhibit a characteristic set of facial, skeletal, and genital abnormalities. Clinical signs may vary from person to person (clinical heterogeneity), even within families. Males with Aarskog syndrome often have a rounded face with a broad forehead. Additional characteristic facial features include widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism), drooping (ptosis) of the eyelids, downwardly slanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures), a small nose with nostrils that are flared forward (anteverted nares), an underdeveloped upper jawbone (maxilliary hypoplasia), and a widow’s peak. Affected individuals may also have an abnormally long groove in the upper lip (philtrum) and a broad nasal bridge.
These children may also have a variety of abnormalities affecting the ears and teeth. Ear abnormalities include low-set ears and thickened, “fleshy” earlobes. Dental abnormalities include missing teeth at birth, delayed eruption of teeth, and underdevelopment of the hard outer covering of teeth (enamel hypoplasia).
Aarskog syndrome is basically a skeletal dysplasia and affected males develop characteristic malformations of the skeletal system including disproportionate short stature; broad, short hands and feet; short, stubby fingers (brachydactyly) with permanent fixation of the fifth fingers in a bent position (clinodactyly); abnormally extendible finger joints; and wide flat feet with bulbous toes. In addition, affected individuals may have a sunken chest (pectus excavatum), protrusion of portions of the large intestine through an abnormal opening in the muscular lining of the abdominal cavity (inguinal hernia), and a prominent navel (umbilicus). Individuals with Aarskog syndrome may have spinal abnormalities such as incomplete closure of the bones of the spinal column (spina bifida occulta), fusion of the upper bones of the spinal column (cervical vertebrae), and underdevelopment of the “peg-like” projection of the second cervical vertebra (odontoid hypoplasia).
Signs that help to make a diagnosis in males with Aarskog syndrome are the genital abnormalities, including a characteristic abnormal fold of skin extending around the base of the penis (“shawl” scrotum) and/or failure of one or both of the testes to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism). In addition, the urinary opening (meatus) may be located on the underside of the penis (hypospadias) and the scrotum may appear clefted or divided (bifid scrotum).
Intellectual disability has been described in some affected boys but it is not a consistent feature of the disorder. Affected individuals may present with a range of mild learning difficulty and/or behavioral disorders: affected children may exhibit developmental delay during infancy, hyperactivity, attention deficit, impulsivity and opposition. Due to this possible spectrum of characteristics, the condition is also referred to as an ADHD syndromic disorder (MRXS16). Failure to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive) and development of chronic respiratory infections have also been described.
An additional spectrum of signs and/or symptoms may occur less frequently, including congenital heart defects; abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis); additional pairs of ribs; incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate) and/or a vertical groove in the upper lip (cleft lip); mild webbing of the fingers; and a short neck with or without webbing. Additional eye abnormalities may be present including crossed eyes (strabismus), farsightedness (hyperopia), and paralysis of certain eye muscles (ophthalmoplegia). Some patients have been reported to have a tendency to be overweight.

