Abetalipoproteinemia

synonyms:
ABLBassen-Kornzweig syndromelow density lipoprotein deficiencymicrosomal triglyceride transfer protein deficiencyMTP deficiencyfamilial hypobetalipoproteinemia due to secretion defect 1 (FHBL-SD1)

overview:
Summary
Abetalipoproteinemia is a rare inherited disorder affecting fat absorption by the intestine and mobilization by the liver. Inability to absorb fat results in deficiencies of lipids and various essential vitamins. Affected individuals experience progressive neurological deterioration, muscle weakness, difficulty walking and blood abnormalities including a condition in which the red blood cells are malformed (acanthocytosis) resulting in low levels of circulating red blood cells (anemia). Affected individuals may also develop degeneration of the retina of the eyes potentially resulting in loss of vision, a condition known as retinitis pigmentosa. Abetalipoproteinemia is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern and is caused by changes (mutations or variants) in the microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTTP) gene.
Introduction
Abetalipoproteinemia was first reported in the medical literature by doctors Bassen and Kornzweig in 1950 and is also known as Bassen-Kornzweig syndrome. The disorder is sometimes classified as a neuroacanthocytosis syndrome, which refers to a group of disorders characterized by spiky or burr-shaped red blood cells (acanthocytosis) and neurological disorders, especially movement disorders.

symptoms:
Individuals with abetalipoproteinemia may experience a wide variety of symptoms affecting various parts of the body including the gastrointestinal tract, neurological system, eyes and blood.
Affected infants often present with symptoms relating to gastrointestinal disease, which occur secondary to poor fat absorption. Such symptoms include pale, bulky foul-smelling stools (steatorrhea), diarrhea, vomiting and swelling (distension) of the abdomen. Affected infants often fail to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive). These symptoms result from poor absorption of fat from the diet. In addition to poor fat absorption, fat-soluble vitamins such as vitamins A, E, and K are also poorly absorbed potentially resulting in fat-soluble vitamin deficiency. Further, patients do not have any apoB-containing lipoproteins in their plasma, and consequently they have very low levels of triglycerides, cholesterol, phospholipids and ceramides. Thus, lipids and fat-soluble vitamins are inadequately transported throughout the blood stream. Some patients may also have reduced non-apoB-containing lipoproteins (high density lipoproteins) or apoA1 levels in their plasma.
Between the ages of 2 and 20 years, a variety of neurological complications occur that resemble spinocerebellar degeneration, a general term for a group of disorders characterized by progressive impairment of the ability to coordinate voluntary movements due to degeneration of certain structures in the brain (cerebellar ataxia). Ataxia results in a lack of coordination and, eventually, difficulty in controlling the range of voluntary movement (dysmetria). Additional neurological symptoms include loss of deep tendon reflexes such as at the kneecap, difficulty speaking (dysarthria), tremors, motor tics and muscle weakness. Intelligence is usually normal, but developmental delays or intellectual disability has been reported.
In some people, the damage or malfunction of the peripheral nervous system (peripheral neuropathy) may occur. The peripheral nervous system contains all the nerves outside of the central nervous system. The associated symptoms can vary greatly from one person to another but can include weakness of the muscles of the arms and legs or abnormal sensations such as tingling (paresthesias), burning or numbness.
Some individuals with abetalipoproteinemia may develop skeletal abnormalities including backward curvature (lordosis) or backward and sideways curvature of the spine (kyphoscoliosis), a highly arched foot (pes cavus) or clubfoot. These skeletal abnormalities may result from muscle imbalances during crucial stages of bone development. Eventually, affected individuals may be unable to stand or to walk unaided due to progressive neurological and skeletal abnormalities.
Some affected individuals may develop a rare eye condition called retinitis pigmentosa in which progressive degeneration of the nerve-rich membrane lining the eyes (retina) results in tunnel vision (loss of peripheral vision), loss of color vision and night blindness. Affected individuals may eventually develop loss of visual acuity. Retinitis pigmentosa occurs most often around the age of 10 years and may be due to vitamin A and/or E deficiency. If left untreated, visual acuity may deteriorate to virtual blindness by the fourth decade of life.
Less often, additional symptoms that affect the eyes have been reported including rapid, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus), irregular concentric and some fine radial streaks (algioid streaks), droopy upper eyelid (ptosis), crossed eyes (strabismus), unequal size of the pupils (anisocoria) and weakness or paralysis of muscles that control eye movements (ophthalmoplegia).
Individuals with abetalipoproteinemia may also have blood abnormalities including a condition called acanthocytosis in which deformed (i.e., burr-shaped) red blood cells (acanthocytes) are present in the body. Acanthocytosis may result in low levels of circulating red blood cells (anemia). Anemia may result in tiredness, increased need for sleep, weakness, lightheadedness, dizziness, irritability, palpitations, headaches and pale skin color. Additional blood abnormalities may be due to vitamin K deficiency. Blood clotting factor levels may be reduced resulting in bleeding tendencies such as severe gastrointestinal bleeding.
Patients may have fatty liver, which can cause liver damage. In rare cases, fibrosis or scarring of the liver (cirrhosis) has also been reported.

