Ablepharon-Macrostomia Syndrome

synonyms:
AMS

overview:
Summary
Ablepharon-macrostomia syndrome (AMS) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by absent or underdeveloped eyelids (ablepharon or microblepharon) and a wide mouth (macrostomia). Characteristics mainly involve the face and skin and rarely involve the internal organs (viscera). Common signs and symptoms in addition to eye and mouth findings include low-set ears with attached earlobes, distortion or fusion of the digits (syndactyly or camptodactyly), bulging cheeks, absent or very small nipples, wrinkled and redundant skin, absent or sparse hair and genital malformations. Other, less frequently reported findings include umbilical abnormalities, growth delay and intellectual disability. AMS has been grouped within the category of diseases called ectodermal dysplasias (genetic disorders that involve defects in the skin, hair, nails, sweat glands, and/or teeth) but because many characteristics involve tissues that are not derived from the ectoderm, it would be better to define AMS as a genuine malformation syndrome. AMS is caused by changes (mutations) in theTWIST2gene. The pattern of inheritance is autosomal dominant, and most cases arise as spontaneous mutations, so occur sporadically.
Mutations inTWIST2also cause the Barber Say syndrome and Setleis syndrome, which have very similar features. Indeed, it has been suggested the three disorders in fact form a continuum (De Maria 2016).
Introduction
ABS was originally described in 1977 (McCarthy and West 1977) in two unrelated boys. Advances have been made in the surgical techniques that improve visual function and cosmetic appearance.

symptoms:
AMS is apparent at birth from features of the head and facial (craniofacial) region. The absence of, or underdevelopment of eyelids and a wide mouth are cardinal features. The abnormalities around the eyes, poor eyelid development and absent eyebrows and eyelashes cause the upper and lower lids to turn outwards (ectropion), exposing the inner mucous membranes and prohibiting complete closure of the eyes (lagophthalmos). This results in dry eyes and corneal clouding, which, if left untreated, can lead to light sensitivity (photophobia) and vision loss. Other potential eye issues include inability to produce tears (alacrimia); repeated involuntary eye movements (nystagmus); an unequal, inward deviation of the eyes (strabismus); and/or complete or partial separation of the retina, the nerve-rich membrane lining the inner layer of the back of the eye, from membranes (choroids) in the outer layer (detached retina).
Infants affected with AMS may have additional, characteristic craniofacial features. Prominent features include a wide nasal bridge, long groove between the nose and lips (philtrum), flared nostrils and thick-flared edges of nostrils (alae nasi). The cheeks superolateral to the corners of mouth may bulge; a sign called “cheek pads”. In addition, in some patients, the zygomatic arches of the skull may be absent. Zygomotic arches are the two bony arches spanning from the lower portion of the orbits of the eyes, across the prominence of the cheekbones to the bones forming part of the lower skull. A small chin, low set ears with attached earlobes and impaired hearing can also be present.
The absence of the soft, downy hair at birth that typically covers most of the body (lanugo), sparse scalp hair, redundant and wrinkled skin, small or absent nipples and underdeveloped genitalia can be found. Unusually formed genitalia can include undescended testis (cryptochordism), urethral opening on the underside of the penis (hypospadias), and a small penis in males or small labia minora in females. Sometimes there is an abdominal hernia, so protrusion of portions of the large intestine through an abnormal opening in the abdominal wall which is covered by skin.
At the extremities, it is common to find syndactyly and camptodactyly; the skin over the hands may be abnormally loose, the fingers may be permanently flexed due to tight skin over the finger joints. While physical growth is generally undisturbed, cognitive development may be delayed. It is possible that many of these signs and symptoms do not capture the entirety of the syndrome, as there are relatively few cases and presentations vary in severity from person to person.

