Achondrogenesis

overview:
Summary
Achondrogenesis is a group of rare skeletal dysplasias characterized by extreme shortening of the arms and legs in relation to the trunk, abnormal development of ribs, vertebra and other skeletal abnormalities. The health problems associated with these conditions are life-threatening and most affected infants are stillborn or die shortly after birth due to respiratory failure. All types of achondrogenesis are genetic conditions; type IA and type IB, are autosomal recessive disorders, whereas achondrogenesis type II is an autosomal dominant disorder. All types of achondrogenesis are very severe skeletal dysplasias usually detected by prenatal ultrasound examination as early as week 14-17 of gestational age.
Introduction
The term achondrogenesis was first used in the medical literature in 1952 by an Italian pathologist named Marco Fraccaro. Achondrogenesis is derived from Greek and means “not producing cartilage.” Achondrogenesis belongs to group of skeletal dysplasias, (also called osteochondrodysplasias), a broad term for a group of disorders (about 450 clinical diagnoses) characterized by abnormal growth or development of cartilage and bone.

symptoms:
Achondrogenesis is characterized by premature birth, abnormal accumulation of fluid in the body (hydrops fetalis), and a head that may be abnormal in shape and less ossified. The head may look disproportionately large, because the body is small. In addition, affected individuals have extremely short limbs and ribs, short neck, flat vertebrae and many other bones of the skeleton are not properly developed. In infants born with this disorder the abdomen is prominent and the thoracic cage is small. Other abnormalities are incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate), corneal clouding, and ear deformities. The disorder is life-threatening either before birth or shortly after birth usually due to underdeveloped thorax and small lungs.
Achondrogenesis type IA (Houston-Harris type) is characterized by varying facial abnormalities (flat face, protruding eyes and protruding tongue or only minor facial anomalies), short trunk and limbs, short beaded ribs and thin skull bones (deficient ossification of the skull). Bone formation is abnormal in the spine, pelvis and extremities, but the degree of the severity of skeletal involvement may be variable. However, small thorax leads to underdevelopment of lungs and death soon after birth.
Achondrogenesis type IB (Fraccaro type) is characterized by short trunk and limbs, narrow chest, and prominent abdomen. Affected infants may have a protrusion around the belly-button (umbilical hernia), or near the groin (inguinal hernia), and have short fingers and toes with feet turned inward. The face may be flat, the palate may be cleft and the neck is usually short. In some cases, the soft tissue of the neck may be abnormally thickened. Achondrogenesis type IB is sub-classified as a sulfation disorder, a small group of disorders associated with mutations in the geneSLC26A2. This group includes diastrophic dysplasia and recessive multiple epiphyseal dysplasia, which are milder conditions. It is important to note that one diagnosis does not change to another while the baby is developing, even if the genetic changes are located in the same gene.
Achondrogenesis type II (Langer-Saldino type) is characterized by a narrow chest, abnormally small or short bones in the arms and/or legs, thin ribs, flat vertebra or deficient ossification of vertebral bodies, underdeveloped lungs, small chin, cleft palate and club feet. Bone formation is abnormal in the spine and pelvis. Abnormal accumulation of fluid may occur (hydrops fetalis) and the abdomen may be enlarged.

