Acoustic Neuroma

synonyms:
acoustic neurilemomaacoustic neurinomafibroblastoma, perineuralneurinoma of the acoustic nerveneurofibroma of the acoustic nerveschwannoma of the acoustic nervevestibular schwannoma

overview:
An acoustic neuroma, also known as a vestibular schwannoma, is a rare benign (non-cancerous) growth that develops on the eighth cranial nerve. This nerve runs from the inner ear to the brain and is responsible for hearing and balance (equilibrium). Although there is no standard or typical pattern of symptom development, hearing loss in one ear (unilateral) is the initial symptom in approximately 90 percent of affected individuals. Additional common findings include ringing in the ears (tinnitus) and dizziness or imbalance. The symptoms of an acoustic neuroma occur from the tumor pressing against the eighth cranial nerve and disrupting its ability to transmit nerve signals to the brain. An acoustic neuroma is not cancerous (malignant); it does not spread to other parts of the body. The reason an acoustic neuroma forms is unknown.

symptoms:
Some individuals, especially those with small tumors, may not have any associated symptoms (asymptomatic). However, even small tumors, depending upon their location, can cause significant symptoms or physical findings.
Acoustic neuromas are slow-growing tumors that can eventually cause a variety of symptoms by pressing against the eighth cranial nerve. Hearing loss in one ear (the ear affected by the tumor) is the initial symptom in approximately 90 percent of patients. Hearing loss is usually gradual, although in some rare cases it can be sudden. In some cases, hearing loss can also fluctuate (worsen and then improve). Hearing loss may be accompanied by ringing in the ears, a condition known as tinnitus, or by a feeling of fullness in the affected ear. In some cases, affected individuals may have difficulty understanding speech that is disproportional to the amount of hearing loss.
Acoustic neuromas can also cause dizziness and problems with balance such as unsteadiness. In rare cases, dizziness or balance problems may occur before noticeable hearing loss. Because these tumors usually grow very slowly, the body can often compensate for these balance problems.
Although slow-growing, acoustic neuromas can eventually become large enough to press against neighboring cranial nerves. While rare, symptoms resulting from the involvement of other cranial nerves include facial weakness or paralysis, facial numbness or tingling, and swallowing difficulties. Facial numbness or tingling can be constant or it may come and go (intermittent).
In some patients, acoustic neuromas may grow large enough to press against the brainstem, preventing the normal flow of cerebrospinal fluid between the brain and spinal cord. This fluid can accumulate in the skull, leading to a phenomenon called hydrocephalus, which causes pressure on the tissues of brain and results in a variety of symptoms including headaches, an impaired ability to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia), and mental confusion. Headaches may also occur in the absence of hydrocephalus and in some rare cases may be the first sign of an acoustic neuroma. In very rare cases, an untreated acoustic neuroma that presses on the brain can cause life-threatening complications.

