Acquired Hemophilia

synonyms:
acquired hemophilia A (AHA)acquired hemophilia B (AHB)

overview:
Summary
Acquired hemophilia (AH) is a rare autoimmune disorder characterized by bleeding that occurs in patients with no personal or family history of diseases related to clotting/coagulation. Autoimmune disorders occur when the body’s immune system mistakenly attacks healthy cells or tissue. In AH, the body produces antibodies (known as inhibitors) that attack clotting factors, most often factor VIII. Clotting factors are specialized proteins required for the blood to clot normally. Consequently, affected individuals develop complications associated with abnormal, uncontrolled bleeding into the muscles, skin and soft tissue that can occur spontaneously, during surgery or following trauma. Specific symptoms can include nosebleeds (epistaxis), bruising throughout the body, solid swellings of congealed blood (hematomas), blood in the urine (hematuria) and gastrointestinal or urogenital bleeding. AH can potentially cause life-threatening bleeding complications in severe cases. In approximately 50% of patients, there is an identifiable underlying clinical condition; in the other 50%, no cause is known (idiopathic).
Introduction
AH is different from congenital hemophilia, a group of rare genetic disorders caused by mutations in the genes encoding certain clotting factors. The main form of hemophilia is hemophilia A (classic hemophilia), which is an X-linked disorder that mostly affects males but can also affect females. It is caused by deficiency or inactivation of factor VIII, the same clotting factor that is affected in most individuals with AH. Although both disorders involve deficiency of the same clotting factor, the bleeding pattern is quite different. The reason the bleeding patterns differ between these disorders is not fully understood.

symptoms:
The symptoms of AH develop because the blood cannot clot properly. Clotting is the process by which blood clumps together to plug the site of a wound. Clotting factors, such as factor VIII, are specialized proteins that are essential for the blood to clot properly.
Although about 1/3 of patients do not require therapy to control bleeds, bleeding severity varies and more than 1/3 of patients suffer multiple bleeding episodes. Subcutaneous bleeding (ecchymoses) is the most common manifestation of AH followed by muscle bleeding (hematoma), gastrointestinal (melena), genitourinary (hematuria) and retroperitoneal. Intracranial hemorrhage is rare, but can be fatal. In contrast to congenital hemophilia A, joint bleeding (hemarthrosis) is infrequent.
Bleeding often occurs without cause (spontaneously).Bleeding episodes are often severe and can become life-threatening. In some patients, delayed diagnosis and the presence of additional medical issues are often contributing factors to the overall severity of AH. Bleeding into the soft tissues can progress rapidly, potentially causing compartment syndrome, a potentially serious, painful condition characterized by increased pressure on muscles, nerves and blood vessels most often within the arms and legs, with damage due to compression of these structures.
Affected Individuals are also at risk of excessive bleeding during surgery or following trauma, even trivial. Genital heavy bleeding in pregnant women may occur especially after childbirth (postpartum period).

