Acquired Lipodystrophy

overview:
Summary
Acquired lipodystrophy is a general term for types of lipodystrophy that are not inherited, but rather acquired at some point during life. Acquired lipodystrophies do not have a direct genetic cause, but rather many different factors may be involved. Acquired lipodystrophies can be caused by medications, autoimmunity or for unknown reasons (idiopathic). Subtypes of acquired lipodystrophy include acquired generalized lipodystrophy (Lawrence syndrome), acquired partial lipodystrophy (Barraquer-Simons syndrome), localized lipodystrophy, and high active antiretroviral induced lipodystrophy, which may develop in HIV-infected individuals undergoing a specific form of treatment. Onset of acquired forms of lipodystrophy can occur during childhood, adolescence or adulthood. Affected individuals develop characteristic loss of body fat (adipose tissue) affecting specific areas of the body, especially the arms, legs, face, neck, and chest or thoracic regions. In some cases, metabolic complications associated with insulin resistance can develop. Such complications include an inability to break down glucose (glucose intolerance), elevated levels of triglycerides (a type of fat) in the blood (hypertriglyceridemia), and diabetes. Additional symptoms such as fat accumulation in the liver (fatty liver or hepatic steatosis) may also occur.
Introduction
Lipodystrophy is a general term for a group of disorders that are characterized by complete (generalized) or partial loss of adipose tissue. Some forms of lipodystrophy are acquired; others are genetic. The degree of severity and the specific areas of the body affected can vary among the lipodystrophies. Some physicians refer to the loss of adipose tissue that characterizes these disorders as lipoatrophy rather than lipodystrophy.

symptoms:
Acquired lipodystrophy encompasses several subtypes. The specific symptoms present, severity, and prognosis can vary greatly depending upon the specific type of acquired lipodystrophy and the presence and extent of associated symptoms. The specific symptoms and severity can also vary among individuals with the same subtype. It is important to note that affected individuals will not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms, and overall prognosis.
ACQUIRED GENERALIZED LIPODYSTROPHY (AGL; LAWRENCE SYNDROME)Individuals with this form of lipodystrophy experience the loss of subcutaneous fat from the face, neck, and arms and legs. The overall extent and pattern of fat loss in AGL is highly variable and can differ significantly from one person to another. In some cases, fat may also be lost from the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet. Intra-abdominal fat may be lost in some people, but preserved in others. The loss of bone marrow fat rarely occurs. Fat loss associated with AGL may occur rapidly over a few weeks or slowly over several months or even years. Fat loss can be severe. Eventually, generalized and near complete loss of fat may occur resulting in prominent veins that bulge out from underneath the skin and an overall muscular appearance.
AGL usually develops during childhood or adolescence, but can occur at any age. During childhood, affected individuals are described as being voracious eaters and may experience accelerated growth. Affected individuals may also experience fatigue.
Individuals with AGL often develop severe insulin resistance, which can result in a variety of metabolic complications. Affected individuals may develop acanthosis nigricans, a skin condition characterized by abnormally increased coloration (hyperpigmentation) and “velvety” thickening (hyperkeratosis) of the skin, particularly of skin fold regions, such as of the neck and groin and under the arms (axillae). Other complications of insulin resistance may occur including glucose intolerance, hypertriglyceridemia, and diabetes. These symptoms are often very difficult to control and diabetes is often severe. Diabetes often occurs after the development of lipodystrophy, but in some cases may occur almost simultaneously.
Some individuals develop abnormal enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly) due to the infiltration and accumulation of fat within the liver. This can be known as hepatic steatosis or fatty liver. Fatty accumulation of the liver in individuals with AGL is often severe and can cause damage and scarring (cirrhosis) to the liver and, eventually, liver dysfunction. In some patients, liver enlargement may be due to autoimmune hepatitis. However, the diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis should be made after review by expert pathologists.
Some individuals may experience extreme hypertriglyceridemia and chylomicronemia, a condition characterized by the accumulation of fatty droplets called chylomicrons in the plasma. In some cases, this can result in episodes of acute inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis). Pancreatitis can be associated with abdominal pain, chills, jaundice, weakness, sweating, vomiting, and weight loss.
After puberty, some women with AGL may develop polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). PCOS is characterized by an imbalance of sex hormones. Affected women have too much androgen, a male hormone, in the body. PCOS can result in irregular menstrual periods or a lack of menstruation, oily skin that is prone to acne, cysts on the ovaries, and mild hirsutism (a male pattern of hair growth). Hair may develop on the upper lip and chin.
AGL can be subdivided into three separate subtypes, known as panniculitis-associated AGL, autoimmune-associated AGL, and AGL of unknown cause (idiopathic).
Individuals with panniculitis-associated AGL generally have a less severe form of the disorder. Panniculitis is inflammation of subcutaneous fat. Individuals with panniculitis-associated AGL may have less severe fat loss and metabolic complications. Fat loss in panniculitis-associated AGL may be localized to a specific part of the body. Lipodystrophy in panniculitis-associated AGL is preceded by the development of painful subcutaneous nodules or lesions consisting of small spots or bumps (maculopapular lesions).
Individuals with autoimmune-associated AGL have past or present evidence of an autoimmune disorder in addition to lipodystrophy. In these cases, AGL is believed to be caused by underlying autoimmune abnormalities. Autoimmune disorders that have been associated with AGL include juvenile dermatomyositis, Sjogren’s syndrome, and rheumatoid arthritis.
In the third type of AGL, panniculitis and autoimmune disorders do not occur and the underlying cause is unknown (idiopathic).
ACQUIRED PARTIAL LIPODYSTROPHY (APL; BARRAQUER-SIMONS SYNDROME)This form of acquired lipodystrophy usually has onset during childhood. Fat distribution is normal at birth and during early childhood. However, at some point later during childhood or adolescence, affected individuals lose subcutaneous fat from the face. Most individuals have noticeable fat loss by the age of 13. Eventually, fat loss extends to the arms, neck, chest and sometimes the upper abdomen. The legs, hips and gluteal regions are usually spared. After puberty in some women, these areas may experience disproportionately excess fat accumulation in the hips and legs. Fat loss is often gradual and may occur over a few months to several years.
Approximately, one fourth of individuals with APL eventually develop a kidney disorder known as membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, which is characterized by inflammation and degeneration of the tiny clusters of blood vessels (capillaries) in the special structures called renal glomeruli that filter the blood as it passes through the kidneys. Glomerulonephritis results in an impaired ability to remove waste and fluid products from the body, which then build up in the blood stream. Kidney problems can develop including blood in the urine, dark urine, decreased urine output, and swelling of various parts of the body. Potentially, kidney disease can progress so that the kidneys fail to function adequately (renal failure or insufficiency). Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis specifically refers to when the condition is caused by an abnormal immune system response.
As they age, some affected individuals may develop abnormally accumulation of yellow or white extracellular material (drusen) in the retina, a membrane in the back of the eyes. Some older affected individuals may develop macular degeneration. Macular degeneration is a general term for a group of eye disorders characterized by the deterioration of the oval-shaped yellow spot (macula) near the center of the retina. The macula is essential for proper vision when looking straight ahead (central vision) and with seeing fine details.
APL is often associated with autoimmune disorders including lupus, dermatomyositis, Celiac disease, pernicious anemia, and vasculitis. Abnormal enlargement of liver (hepatomegaly) has been reported in some cases.
Most forms of lipodystrophy are associated with metabolic complications due to insulin resistance. However, in most cases of APL, insulin resistance and such associated symptoms do not occur. In rare cases, in which insulin resistance does develop, associated symptoms can include glucose intolerance, hypertriglyceridemia, hirsutism, and diabetes.
HIGH ACTIVE ANTIRETROVIRAL THERAPY (HAART) INDUCED LIPODYSTROPHY (LD-HIV)This form of lipodystrophy occurs in individuals with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) after receiving antiretroviral therapy known as HIV-1 protease inhibitor-containing HAART. The development of lipodystrophy is related to the intensity and duration of treatment. In many individuals, protease inhibitors and nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors are implicated in the development of lipodystrophy. In most cases, LD-HIV develops in individuals who have received this therapy for 2 years or more.
In most cases, affected individuals gradually lose subcutaneous fat from the arms, legs and face. Some individuals may develop excess fat in the face, neck, upper back and waist. This can cause a double chin, a hump on the upper back, and expand the circumference of the waist. Fat loss gets progressively worse with ongoing HAART therapy and does not reverse when the therapy is discontinued. Many individuals may also develop hypertriglyceridemia. Diabetes may also occur, but is rare. Individuals may be at an increased risk of developing coronary heart disease.
LOCALIZED LIPODYSTROPHYThis form of lipodystrophy is characterized by subcutaneous fat loss in a small area of the body only. Localized lipodystrophy may result at the site of a drug injection (such as insulin). Affected individuals have a loss of subcutaneous fat in the affected area that presents as a dimple or crater with overlying skin usually unaffected. In some individuals, large adjacent (contiguous) areas of the body may be involved.

