Acrodysostosis

synonyms:
acrodysostosis with or without hormone resistanceArkless-Graham syndromeMaroteaux-Malamut syndrome

overview:
Summary
Acrodysostosis is a rare genetic disorder characterized by skeletal malformations, growth delays, short stature, and distinctive facial features caused, in part, by underdeveloped (hypoplastic) of certain facial bones, particularly those in the middle portion of the face. A characteristic symptom is abnormally small hands and feet with short, stubby fingers and toes that may affect all or some of the fingers and toes. Some affected children have varying degrees of intellectual disability; in other children intelligence is unaffected. Some children experience resistance to certain hormones, which means that the tissues of the body do not respond to the hormone in question despite normal or high activity levels of the hormone. Acrodysostosis may be caused by mutations in the PRKAR1A gene (type 1) or the PDE4D gene (type 2). These mutations usually occur sporadically without a positive family history; mutations in PDE4D can be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. It is likely that additional forms of acrodysostosis exist; caused by as-yet-unidentified gene mutations.

symptoms:
Although researchers have been able to establish a clear syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about the disorder is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified cases, the lack of large clinical studies, and the possibility of other genes influencing the disorder prevent physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Parents should talk to their children’s physicians and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
Skeletal malformations that characterize acrodysostosis include abnormal short, malformed (dysplastic) bones in the hands and feet. These dysplastic bones cause the hands and feet to be abnormally small with short, stubby fingers and toes (severe brachydactyly). In some individuals, the shortness may affect only one or two fingers and/or toes. The big toes are often not affected, or can be abnormally large. Abnormalities of the hands and feet are detected early in childhood (congenital). Abnormal shortening of the long bones is also common and can result in short stature.
Additional skeletal malformations include spinal malformations such as abnormal curvature of the spine (e.g. scoliosis or kyphosis), and a risk of spinal stenosis, a condition marked by narrowing (stenosis) of the spaces within the spinal canal, spinal nerve root canals, or bones of the spinal column. Affected individuals may experience numbness or pain in the lower back and/or legs. The chondrodysplasia develops and becomes more noticeable over time.
Individuals with acrodysostosis often have distinctive facial features including underdevelopment of the upper jaw (maxillary hypoplasia) and underdevelopment of the nasal bone (nasal hypoplasia) so that the nose is abnormally small and the bridge of the nose may be flattened or depressed. In some cases, the tip of the nose is rounded (bulbous) and the nostrils point upward giving the appearance of an upturned nose (anteverted nares). The lower jaw bone (mandible) may appear abnormally prominent. Additional features can include widely-spaced eyes (hypertelorism), an extra fold of skin on either side of the nose that may cover the inner corners of the eyes (epicanthal folds), failure of the upper and lower teeth to meet properly (malocclusion), and low-set ears.
Some affected individuals may exhibit mild to moderate intellectual disability and experience delays in acquiring skills that require both mental and motor coordination (psychomotor delays), learning disabilities, and delays in learning to walk and talk.
Growth before birth (antenatal growth) is usually severely affected and babies are born small for gestational age. Mild to moderate growth delays after birth may also occur and affected individuals are often below average height for their age (short stature). A great part of the height deficit is due to the lack of the pubertal growth spurt.
Some individuals develop resistance to multiple hormones such as parathyroid hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone. Resistance means that although the hormones are present in normal -or even high- levels, the tissues of the body do not fully respond to their presence or effects. In most patients with hormone resistance, the rise of the circulating level of the hormone is sufficient to induce the expected effect of the hormone (for example, the rise in parathyroid hormone will allow the body to maintain a normal serum calcium level). Under certain conditions, individuals may develop symptoms similar to those seen in individuals with deficiency of these hormones.
Additional physical findings have been reported in individuals with acrodysostosis including repeated middle ear infections (otitis media), hearing loss, obesity, skin lesions that are flesh-colored, brown or black (pigmented nevi), blue eyes, and red or blond hair. Affected individuals may eventually develop arthritic changes in the hands which can lead to problems moving the hands with skill and coordination (manual dexterity). In some affected males the opening of the urethra is on the underside of the penis rather than the tip (hypospadias) and/or testes may fail to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism).
Certain metabolic and cardiovascular manifestations have also been reported in acrodysostosis including high blood pressure (hypertension). Some reports suggest that affected individuals are at an increased risk for narrowing of the blood vessels (vascular stenosis).
Individuals with acrodysostosis type 1 appear to be more likely to develop hormone resistance. Individuals with acrodysostosis type 2 are more likely to have intellectual disability and characteristic facial features. Some recent cases described in the medical literature suggest that hormone resistance is more common in individuals with acrodysostosis type 2 than previously believed.

