Acrocallosal Syndrome, Schinzel Type

synonyms:
Absence of Corpus Callosum, Schinzel TypeACLSACSHallux Duplication, Postaxial Polydactyly, and Absence of Corpus CallosumSchinzel Acrocallosal Syndrome

overview:
Acrocallosal syndrome, Schinzel type is a rare genetic disorder that is apparent at birth (congenital). Associated symptoms and findings may be variable, including among affected members of the same family (kindred). However, the disorder is typically characterized by underdevelopment (hypoplasia) or absence (agenesis) of the thick band of nerve fibers joining the two hemispheres of the brain (corpus callosum) and moderate to severe mental retardation. In addition, many affected individuals have malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region and/or distinctive abnormalities of the fingers and toes (digits). Characteristic craniofacial abnormalities may include an unusually large head (macrocephaly) with a prominent forehead, widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism), downslanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures), a small nose with a broad nasal bridge; and malformed (dysplastic) ears. Most affected individuals also have distinctive digital malformations, such as the presence of extra (supernumerary) fingers and toes (polydactyly) and webbing or fusion (syndactyly) of certain digits. Additional physical abnormalities may also be present, including growth retardation, resulting in short stature. Although autosomal recessive inheritance has been suggested, acrocallosal syndrome often appears to occur randomly for unknown reasons (sporadically).

symptoms:
In individuals with acrocallosal syndrome, Schinzel type, the range and severity of associated findings may be extremely variable.  However, in all reported cases to date, the disorder has been characterized by underdevelopment (hypoplasia) or absence (agenesis) of the thick band of nerve fibers joining the two hemispheres of the brain (corpus callosum) as well as moderate to severe mental retardation.  In some cases, brain malformations may be associated with additional complications, such as sudden episodes of uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain (seizures) or hydrocephalus, a condition in which impaired flow or absorption of the fluid that circulates through cavities (ventricles) of the brain and the spinal canal (cerebrospinal fluid [CSF]) potentially leads to increasing fluid pressure in the brain.  Individuals with acrocallosal syndrome may also have abnormally diminished muscle tone (hypotonia) and experience severe psychomotor retardation–or marked delays in the development of certain physical, mental, or behavioral skills that are typically acquired at particular stages (i.e, “developmental milestones”).  Over 50 percent of affected individuals also have abnormal growth delays, often resulting in short stature.
Acrocallosal syndrome, Schinzel type is also often associated with distinctive malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region.  Such abnormalities often include an unusually large head (macrocephaly) with a high, broad, bulging forehead; a prominent back region of the head (occiput); and underdeveloped midfacial regions (midface hypoplasia).  In addition, the “soft spot” at the front of the skull (anterior fontanelle) may be abnormally large in some affected infants or children.  (The “soft spots” or fontanelles [anterior and posterior fontanelles] are the membrane-covered gaps between bones of the skull at birth.)  Individuals with acrocallosal syndrome may also have a small, short nose; a broad nasal bridge; upwardly turned nostrils (anteverted nares); and malformed (dysplastic) ears that may be abnormally rotated toward the back of the head (posteriorly rotated).  In some instances, additional craniofacial abnormalities may also be present, such as protruding lips, an abnormal groove in the upper lip (cleft lip), and/or incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate).
Individuals with acrocallosal syndrome may also have abnormalities affecting the eyes.  These may include widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); downwardly slanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures); vertical skin folds (epicanthal folds) that may cover the eyes’ inner corners; and drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis).  In some instances, additional eye (ocular) defects may be present, such as internal deviation of one eye toward the other (convergent strabismus or esotropia); abnormalities of the colored (pigmented) layers of the retinas or the nerve-rich, innermost membranes of the eyes (i.e., decreased retinal pigmentation); and/or degeneration of the nerves that transmit impulses from the retinas to the brain (optic atrophy).  In such cases, the degree of visual impairment depends upon the severity and/or combination of eye abnormalities present.
Acrocallosal syndrome, Schinzel type is also typically characterized by distinctive malformations of the fingers and toes (digits).  For example, in many affected individuals, there may be duplication or the presence of extra (supernumerary) great toes (halluces) and, in some cases, partial duplication of the thumbs (preaxial polydactyly) with abnormal division of the bones at the ends of the thumbs (bifid terminal phalanges).  There may also be duplication of certain digits toward the “pinky” side of the hands and the “small toe” side of the feet (i.e., postaxial polydactyly).  Additional digital abnormalities often include webbing or fusion (syndactyly) of certain fingers or toes, particularly of the first to the third toes, and underdevelopment or fusion of affected nails.
In some cases, additional physical abnormalities may also be associated with the disorder.  Some affected infants may have structural heart malformations at birth (congenital heart defects).  These typically include an abnormal opening in the fibrous partition (septum) that separates the upper or lower chambers of the heart (atrial or ventricular septal defects) or abnormalities of the heart valve (i.e., pulmonary valve) that enables blood to flow from the lower right chamber (ventricle) of the heart to the lungs while preventing the backflow of blood into the right ventricle.  In addition, in some affected individuals, there may be protrusion of part of the intestines into muscles of the groin (inguinal hernia) or through a weakness in the abdominal wall around the navel (umbilical hernia).  Others may have an epigastric hernia or protrusion of an internal organ through the membrane in the middle region of the abdomen above the navel.  Some affected males may also have genital abnormalities, such as undescended testes (cryptorchidism), abnormal placement of the urinary opening (hypospadias), and/or an unusually small penis (micropenis).
In some infants with acrocallosal syndrome, the period shortly after birth (neonatal period) may be complicated by seizure episodes, feeding difficulties, and an increased risk of respiratory infections.  In some cases, respiratory infections as well as breathing difficulties (dyspnea), lack of sufficient oxygen supply to bodily tissues (hypoxia), and other associated abnormalities (i.e., respiratory distress) may lead to potentially life-threatening complications.
As mentioned previously, reports in the medical literature suggest that the symptoms and findings associated with acrocallosal syndrome, Schinzel type may vary greatly in range and severity from case to case.  For example, some investigators have reported “incomplete” forms of the disorder in which duplication of the great toes (preaxial polydactyly) or certain characteristic craniofacial features were not present.  In other reported cases, the siblings of some individuals with the disorder have been affected by anencephaly, a congenital abnormality characterized by absence of the top of the skull (skullcap or calvaria) and major portions of the brain (e.g., cerebral hemispheres).  Some researchers suggest that anencephaly may represent a severe manifestation of the spectrum of brain malformations potentially associated with acrocallosal syndrome.

