Acromegaly

overview:
Acromegaly is a rare, slowly progressive, acquired disorder that affects adults. It occurs when the pituitary gland produces too much growth hormone (GH). The pituitary gland is a small gland located near the base of the skull that stores several hormones and releases them into the bloodstream as needed by the body. These hormones regulate many different bodily functions. In most patients, acromegaly is caused by the growth of a benign tumor (adenoma), arising from the pituitary gland. Symptoms of acromegaly include abnormal enlargement in bones of the hands, arms, feet, legs and head. Enlargement of the bones in the jaws and in the front of the skull are typically the most apparent bony changes. Acromegaly may also cause thickening of the soft tissues of the body, including the heart, lips and tongue. If untreated, acromegaly can potentially cause serious illness and life-threatening complications. When excessive secretion of growth hormone occurs before puberty, the disorder is known as gigantism, not acromegaly.

symptoms:
The symptoms of acromegaly generally occur slowly and become more noticeable as affected individuals age. The specific symptoms that develop may vary greatly from one person to another. Acromegaly can potentially cause a wide variety of symptoms and physical findings.
Facial features gradually become coarse because of the overgrowth of soft tissues and cartilage. Facial bones gradually become prominent, the lower jaw protrudes (prognathism) and an underbite may cause a wide separation and misalignment between the teeth (malocclusion). Affected individuals may also have an abnormally large tongue and unusually thick, full lips. People with acromegaly eventually develop a deep and husky voice due to thickening of the vocal cords and enlargement of the sinuses.
Acromegaly also results in a gradual enlargement of the hands and feet. Affected individuals may notice that rings feel tighter or no longer fit at all, and that their shoe size and width has increased. Overgrowth (hypertrophy) of bone and enlargement of cartilage in the joints may result in inflammation and gradual degeneration of involved joints (osteoarthritis). Joint and muscle pain (arthralgia and myalgia) often develops, especially affecting the large joints such as the knees, shoulders, hands, wrists and hips.
In some people with acromegaly, the spine may abnormally curve from side to side and from front to back (kyphoscoliosis). Overgrowth of tissue may trap nerves, causing numbness and weakness of the hands (carpal tunnel syndrome). Abnormal darkening and thickening of patches of skin in certain areas of the body (acanthosis nigricans), an excessive amount of body hair (hirsutism) and small abnormal outgrowths of extra skin (skin tags) may also be present.
In some patients, acromegaly may cause abnormal enlargement of certain organs including the heart. Symptoms may include difficulty breathing upon exertion (dyspnea) and/or irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias). Heart involvement in acromegaly can ultimately lead to congestive heart failure, in which the heart cannot properly circulate blood to the lungs and the rest of the body, resulting in fluid buildup in the heart, lung and various body tissues.
Additional symptoms of acromegaly may include abnormal enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly), spleen (splenomegaly), intestines and/or kidneys. The thyroid (goiter) and/or the adrenal glands may also become abnormally enlarged.
Approximately 25 percent of people with acromegaly have elevated blood pressure (hypertension). Abnormal enlargement of the pituitary gland, located at the base of the skull, may cause headaches, visual abnormalities and/or hormonal deficiencies. In approximately 50 percent of people with acromegaly, excessive levels of growth hormone (GH) secreted by the pituitary gland may influence the production of insulin, a hormone produced by the pancreas that regulates blood sugar (glucose) levels by promoting the movement of glucose into cells in the body. Abnormalities in insulin action may result in elevated levels of blood sugar (glucose) and some individuals with acromegaly may develop insulin resistance or type 2 diabetes mellitus. Some people with acromegaly may have an increased metabolic rate, excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis) and/or increased production of oil (sebum) by the sebaceous glands in the skin, resulting in abnormally oily skin.
Individuals with acromegaly may develop breathing (respiratory) abnormalities including sleep apnea, a common sleep disorder characterized by temporary, recurrent interruptions of breathing during sleep. Symptoms of the disorder include wakefulness during the night, excessive sleepiness during the day, loud snoring and/or obesity. In obstructive apnea, the most common form of sleep apnea, labored breathing is interrupted by airway collapse or blockage from enlarged soft tissue. Partial awakening may then occur and the person may gasp for air. Sleep is resumed as breathing begins again. Untreated sleep apnea may be associated with high blood pressure, irregular heartbeats, swelling in the arms and/or legs, hallucinations, anxiety and/or irritability.
Females with acromegaly may experience an abnormal flow of milk from the breasts (galactorrhea), and infrequent or delayed menstrual flow (oligomenorrhea). Males with acromegaly may experience impotence and a decrease in sexual drive (decreased libido). Individuals with acromegaly have an increased risk of developing polyps in the colon. Individuals with acromegaly may have a slightly greater risk of developing colon cancer than the general population.
Symptoms that may develop late during the course of acromegaly include muscle weakness and impaired function of peripheral nerves (i.e., nerves that lie outside the brain and spinal cord). Vision of some affected individuals may become impaired and possibly progress to blindness. If untreated, 25 percent of people with acromegaly experience symptoms associated with uncontrolled diabetes including an increase in the amount of sugar in their urine (glycosuria), abnormally excessive thirst (polydipsia) and/or an abnormally increased appetite (polyphagia).

