Activated Phosphoinositide 3-Kinase Delta Syndrome (APDS)

synonyms:
p110-delta-activating mutation causing senescent T cells, lymphadenopathy, and immunodeficiency (PASLI)Immunodeficiency 14PI3K- delta syndrome

overview:
SummaryActivated phosphoinositide 3-kinase delta syndrome (APDS) is a rare, inherited condition that affects the way the immune system works. The most common symptoms of APDS are frequent upper respiratory tract infections, sinus infections, ear infections, bronchitis and pneumonia (lung infection). Most people with APDS get their first infection in early childhood, but symptoms can begin at any age. Other symptoms include gastrointestinal irritation, lymph node swelling, enlarged liver and spleen and an increased risk for lymphoma. Over time, frequent ear and respiratory tract infections can lead to permanent hearing loss and scarring of the lungs (bronchiectasis).
There are two types of APDS: APDS1 is due to changes in thePIK3CDgene and APDS2 is due to changes in thePIK3R1gene. Both have similar symptoms and are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern in families. Treatment for APDS is focused on managing symptoms, preventing infections and lowering inflammation. It includes antibiotics to treat infections, anti-inflammatory drugs, immunoglobulin replacement and hematopoietic stem-cell transplant (HSCT).
IntroductionAPDS was first described in 2013 and is one of the primary immunodeficiencies. People with a primary immunodeficiency are born with an immune system that doesn’t work correctly and get frequent infections that can be hard to treat. There are hundreds of primary immunodeficiencies, many with similar signs and symptoms. Specialized testing is often necessary to tell the primary immunodeficiencies apart and make a specific diagnosis.

symptoms:
APDS affects each person differently. Some people have very mild symptoms, while others are much more severely impacted. Most people with APDS begin to have symptoms in childhood. However, symptoms can begin at any age, and some people do not develop symptoms until adulthood. There are some reports of people who have been diagnosed with APDS who do not have any symptoms.
The first signs of APDS are usually infections beginning in early childhood. The most common of these are ear infections, sinus infections and pneumonia. Over time, frequent respiratory tract infections can lead to scarring of the lungs (bronchiectasis). This is more common in APDS1 than APDS2. Viral infections are also common, especially infections with Epstein-Barr virus and herpes simplex viruses. These infections may be difficult to treat and may never completely go away.
People with APDS may develop enlarged lymph nodes, as well as an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly) or spleen (splenomegaly). Inflammation of the intestine can also occur, leading to severe diarrhea which sometimes results in hospitalization. Skin infections are also common.
Some people develop autoimmunity, causing the body’s immune system to attack its own healthy cells. Autoimmune disease can have an impact on many different organs and body systems. In APDS, the most common sign of autoimmune disease is a low level of red blood cells causing anemia, or fewer platelets leading to bleeding problems and easy bruising.
Growth delay, short stature and neurodevelopmental delay have also been seen in people with APDS. Shorter than average stature is more common in APDS2. People with APDS also have an increased risk of developing lymphoma and other blood cancers.

