Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome

synonyms:
acute lung injuryadult respiratory distress syndromeARDSnoncardiogenic pulmonary edemaincreased-permeability pulmonary edema

overview:
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a type of severe, acute lung dysfunction affecting all or most of both lungs that occurs as a result of illness or injury. Although it is sometimes called adult respiratory distress syndrome, it may also affect children. ARDS is a buildup of fluid in the small air sacs (alveoli) in the lungs. This makes it difficult for oxygen to get into the bloodstream. Major symptoms may include breathing difficulties (dyspnea), rapid breathing (tachypnea), excessively deep and rapid breathing (hyperventilation) and insufficient levels of oxygen in the circulating blood (hypoxemia). ARDS may develop in conjunction with widespread infection in the body (sepsis) or as a result of pneumonia, trauma, shock, severe burns, aspiration of food into the lung, multiple blood transfusions, and inhalation of toxic fumes, among other things. It usually develops within 24 to 48 hours after the original illness or injury and is considered a medical emergency. It may progress to involvement of other organs.

symptoms:
Typically, ARDS develops within 24 to 48 hours of the original illness or injury. It may become a life-threatening condition characterized by inflammation of the lungs, which may begin in one lung but eventually affects both, and leads to damage to the air sacs (alveoli) and surrounding small blood vessels. The damaged alveoli close down or fill up with fluid (lung edema), thereby losing their ability to oxygenate the blood and eliminate carbon dioxide. Patients experience increasingly severe respiratory distress, associated with decreasing oxygen levels in arterial blood and tissues.
With the fluid buildup, the lungs become heavy, stiff, and unable to expand properly. Most patients require mechanical ventilation because of respiratory failure. The disorder may also be accompanied or followed by impairment of other vital functions, including cardiovascular, renal, hepatic, hematologic, and neurologic functions. Involvement of other organs in addition to the lungs may lead to a condition sometimes called multi-organ dysfunction syndrome.
The person with ARDS may initially appear agitated as a result of breathing difficulty (rapid breathing or shortness of breath), but later may become lethargic and or even comatose. The patient may appear pale, and the hands and feet may have a bluish-gray tone because of the diminished level of oxygen in the blood

