Acute Myeloid Leukemia

synonyms:
acute granulocytic leukemiaacute myelogenous leukemiaacute myelogenous leukemiaacute nonlymphocytic leukemiaAML

overview:
Summary

symptoms:
Some symptoms of acute myeloid leukemia result from disruption of the normal formation of blood cells. There are three main types of blood cells – red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. These cells are formed in the bone marrow and they arise from hematopoietic stem cells, a type of adult stem cell.
In AML, immature cells known as myeloblasts build up in the bone marrow, crowding out healthy cells and interfering with the normal production of blood cells. This leads to a deficiency of these mature blood cells, a condition called pancytopenia. Red blood cells deliver oxygen to the body, white blood cells help in fighting infections, and platelets allow the body to form clots to stop bleeding. A low level of circulating red blood cells is called anemia. A low level of white blood cells is called leukopenia. A low level of platelets is called thrombocytopenia.
Because of the lack of healthy blood cells, affected individuals may experience weakness, fatigue, shortness of breath (dyspnea), recurrent infections (which can cause fever, body aches, and night sweats), and prolonged bleeding. Affected individuals may appear pale and they may bruise easily (including with minor injury or without a reason). There may be a loss in appetite and unintended weight loss. Inflammation of tissue in the mouth can cause swollen, bleeding gums, sores and be painful.
Some individuals develop small red or purples spots on the skin called petechiae that are caused by bleeding under the skin, or larger, purple spots called ecchymoses caused by bleeding from ruptured blood vessels under the skin. Some people have chronic or severe nosebleeds. Some women will have abnormally heavy or prolonged bleeding during their menstrual periods (menorrhagia).
Some people may have sternal tenderness, which refers to chronic pain or tenders in the breastbone (sternum). Affected individuals may have abnormally enlarged lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy). Less often, the liver and/or spleen may be enlarged, which is called hepatosplenomegaly.
Some people with AML, mainly those who have not been treated or received a delayed diagnosis, develop hyperleukocytosis and leukostasis. Hyperleukocytosis means that a person’s white blood cell levels are at abnormally high levels. This can cause symptoms, particularly affecting the lungs or central nervous system. When symptoms occur, this is called leukostasis. Leukostasis can be characterized by headaches, confusion, seizures, visual disturbances, difficulty breathing, respiratory failure, or coma. Both conditions are medical emergencies, even in people without noticeable symptoms.
Myeloid sarcoma is when a group of leukemic (malignant) cells form a mass or tumor outside of the bone marrow (extramedullary disease). This is a rare occurrence in AML. Common sites for a myeloid sarcoma include bone, soft tissues, lymph nodes, and the periosteum, a dense layer of fibrous tissue that covers bone. Myeloid sarcoma is also known as chloroma, granulocytic sarcoma, or myeloblastoma. Sometimes, a myeloid sarcoma will develop without any evidence of leukemic cells in the bone marrow or circulating blood.
Some individuals will develop leukemia cutis, which is when cancer cells travel (migrate) to the skin. This can cause a variety of skin problems including spots, bumps, or rashes. Leukemia cutis is estimated to affect fewer than 10% of people with AML.
Although uncommon, leukemic cells can spread to affect the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system).

