Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia

synonyms:
APLAPML

overview:
Summary
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a blood cancer characterized by a marked increase in a type of immature white blood cells known as promyelocytes. It develops in about 600 to 800 individuals each year in the United States, most often in adults around the age of 40 but also in children. The characteristic symptom of APL is the associated bleeding disorder (coagulopathy), which can lead to excessive bleeding but also to blood clot formation (thrombosis). In APL and other types of leukemia, the bone marrow is filled by malignant cells and is unable to produce functional cells. A decreased number of platelets (thrombocytopenia) is one of the contributing factors to the bleeding often present in APL. A decreased number of red blood cells (anemia) can lead to pallor and fatigue, while a decreased number of functional white blood cells (neutropenia) predispose affected individuals to infections. Fever, chills, night sweats and weight loss, which are collectively known as constitutional or “B” symptoms, are also common in APL. The treatment of APL is centered on elimination of the malignant cells and supportive care with transfusion of blood products to minimize the risk of bleeding or thrombosis, Medications, especially all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA; tretinoin) and arsenic trioxide allow malignant promyelocytes to mature into neutrophils, which are unable to proliferate and subsequently eliminated.
Introduction
Circulating blood cells are formed in a region in the middle of large bones known as the bone marrow and are all derived from a primitive type of cell known as the hematopoietic stem cell. Hematopoiesis refers to the process of formation of blood cells from hematopoietic stem cells. The two principal lineages of blood cells are the myeloid and lymphoid cells. Cells derived from the myeloid lineage include red blood cells (erythrocytes), platelets (thrombocytes) and granulocytes and monocytes. A promyelocyte is a type of myeloid cell that normally matures to granulocytes. Eosinophils, neutrophils and basophils are the three types of mature granulocytes.
Leukemia is defined as the uncontrolled proliferation of abnormal leukocytes in the blood and bone marrow. APL is a type of leukemia caused by the uncontrolled proliferation of promyelocytes that are arrested in their normal maturation process. It is a subtype of acute myeloid leukemia (AML), but it has its own uniquely different disease mechanism, clinical manifestations and treatment. APL is a medical emergency, as treatment must be initiated as soon as the disease is suspected in order to decrease the risk of complications associated with APL coagulopathy.
The development of therapy for APL is a success story in the realm of cancer and leukemia treatment. Before modern treatments were developed, most affected individuals did not survive more than one month after diagnosis due to bleeding and/or infection. Research that elucidated the molecular mechanisms by which APL develops led to the development of ATRA, an oral medication that specifically targets the genetic defects in APL. Nowadays, with ATRA and other targeted therapies, such as arsenic trioxide (ATO), APL has shifted from an often-fatal disease to a highly curable form of leukemia.

symptoms:
APL most commonly occurs in middle-aged individuals. The median age at diagnosis is around 40 years, meaning that half of cases occur in people under that age and the other half in people above that age. In APL, the bone marrow is overcrowded with malignant cells and eventually fails to produce normal blood cells required for normal functioning. Depletion of red blood cells (anemia) leads to symptoms such as fatigue and pallor, while a decreased number of functional white blood cells predispose affected individuals to infections. A decreased number of platelets (thrombocytopenia) increases the risk of bleeding and bruising.
The most dangerous symptom of APL is the bleeding disorder (coagulopathy) associated with the disease. Coagulopathy is common in all types of leukemia, mainly due to thrombocytopenia. However, molecules present in APL cells can lead to a severe coagulopathy characterized by the breakdown of the clotting factors known as fibrinogen and fibrin (systemic fibrinolysis), and the development of a condition called disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). In DIC, the coagulation system of the body is abnormally activated, and coagulation factors are excessively consumed. This leads to numerous complications, including bleeding and the formation of blood clots (thrombosis). Bleeding in the skin and mucous membranes can manifest as small red or purple spots (petechiae) or patches (purpura) or as bruises (ecchymoses). Affected individuals may also bleed excessively from their gums or from sites of minor trauma such as vascular puncture sites. Other sites of bleeding include blood in the stools (hematochezia) due to gastrointestinal bleeding, blood in the urine (hematuria) due to bleeding in the genitourinary tract, excessive menstrual blood losses (menorrhagia) and excessive or recurrent nose bleeding (epistaxis). Bleeding inside the skull (intracranial hemorrhage) and pulmonary hemorrhage are the two most common causes of hemorrhagic death in APL. Symptoms of intracranial hemorrhage depend on the region of the brain that is affected and include arms and/or leg weakness, headaches, vomiting and a decreased level of consciousness. Pulmonary hemorrhage can lead to cough, shortness of breath (dyspnea) and coughing up blood (hemoptysis). In addition to excessive bleeding, APL-associated coagulopathy increases the likelihood of forming abnormal blood clots that can dislodge and obstruct blood vessels (thromboembolism). Occlusion of blood vessels in the lungs may result from a pulmonary embolism, while obstruction of vessels in the brain and the heart can respectively lead to a stroke and heart attack (myocardial infarction). DIC can also lead to organ dysfunction, most notably of the liver and kidneys.
In addition to coagulopathy, constitutional symptoms are common at presentation. These symptoms, also called B symptoms, occur with many types of cancer and are also associated with some infections and autoimmune diseases. Although their exact cause is unknown, a probable contributing factor is the release of molecules that modulate immunity and inflammation (cytokines). These cytokines are thought to be released by the malignant cells. Constitutional symptoms include fever, fatigue, chills, weight loss, and drenching night sweats.
Differentiation syndrome is a potentially severe complication of APL treatment that occurs in up to a quarter of patients. It most often occurs within 2 to 21 days after treatment initiation and is characterized by fever, rash, swelling due to accumulation of fluid (edema), shortness of breath (dyspnea), low blood pressure (hypotension), kidney and liver dysfunction and accumulation of fluid within or around the lungs (pleural effusion) and the heart (pericardial effusion). Another rare complication of APL treatment is called idiopathic intracranial hypertension. (For more information on this condition, choose “idiopathic intracranial hypertension” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
Most deaths due to APL occur early in the disease because of hemorrhage, infection or differentiation syndrome. Older age, male sex, high white blood cell count, increased creatinine levels (a marker of renal function) and abnormal fibrinogen levels (a coagulation factor) have been associated with an increased risk of early death in APL. White blood cell count is particularly important for risk stratification: APL with a white blood cell count of more than 10,000 cells per microliter is considered high-risk APL, while a white blood cell count under this value is considered standard-risk APL. Once the critical early period has passed, most patients are able to be cured. A large study carried on in the United States that included APL patients that had survived more than 48 hours after diagnosis found that 88% of individuals were alive after 5 years of follow-up.

