Acute Cholecystitis

synonyms:
acute acalculous cholecystitis (AAC)acute calculous cholecystitis

overview:
The gallbladder is a small pear shaped organ that stores and concentrates bile used for digestion of fats. Bile is a compound composed mainly of cholesterol, bile salts and bilirubin, produced by the liver and stored in the gallbladder during fasting states.  When food is consumed, it is partially digested by the stomach and enters the small intestine, where bile is released by the gallbladder to aid in the breakdown of fats. Gallstones develop when the components of bile, such as cholesterol and bilirubin, remain in the gallbladder and solidify into “pebble-like” material. Gallstones may lodge in the bile ducts and block the release of bile causing a backup. Up to 80% of all gallstones do not cause symptoms but obstruction within the bile ducts can cause gallbladder swelling (distension) and severe pain and tenderness of right side of abdomen and/or back (biliary colic). If the obstruction persists, it results in inflammation, infection, and even lack of blood flow (ischemia), a common condition known as acute cholecystitis, or acute calculous cholecystitis (ACC).  Repeated mild episodes of acute cholecystitis may result in chronic cholecystitis, causing thickening and shrinking of the gallbladder wall resulting in an inability to store bile.
Another form of cholecystitis, acute acalulous cholecystitis (AAC) is an inflammatory disease of the gallbladder without evidence of gallstones or obstruction of the cystic ducts. Approximately 2-15% of cases of cholecystitis are acalculous and usually occur in very sick hospitalized patients. The exact causal mechanism is not clear. Acalculous cholecystitis is associated with a higher mortality rate (~45%) due in part to serious underlying medical conditions and delayed diagnosis.

symptoms:
Acute Calculous Cholecystitis
The specific symptoms associated with cholecystitis vary among patients. Upper abdominal pain, often localized to the right upper quadrant, is the most common symptom. In acute calculous cholecystitis, the pain is often sudden and intense but it can be described as cramping, dull, or steady. Pain can become excruciating. Upper abdominal pain usually lasts longer than six hours, often beginning a few hours after a meal or at night. It can worsen with deep breaths and may radiate into the back and right shoulder blade (scapula). The right upper quadrant will likely be tender and 25% of patients have a perceptible mass there after 24 hours of symptoms.
In addition to pain, many affected individuals experience nausea, vomiting and shortness of breath when inhaling (due to pain). Additional symptoms of cholecystitis include stiffening of the muscles on the right side of the abdomen, bloating of the abdomen, chills, and fever. Blood testing may show an increase in white blood cell count and C-reactive protein (elevation indicates inflammation). If serum amylase levels are elevated, the patient may also have gallstone pancreatitis or gangrenous cholecystitis. Although bilirubin may be elevated, development of frank jaundice in the absence of other complications is rare. If jaundice does occur, persistent yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes, and whites of the eyes will be present.  In rare cases, symptoms such as dark urine and clay colored stools are indicative of common bile duct obstruction.
Older individuals with cholecystitis may not develop pain or fever. Their only symptoms may be tenderness of the upper right portion of the abdomen, altered mental status, or decreased food intake.
Affected individuals may develop a bacterial infection preceding or during a gallbladder attack. In most patients, a gallbladder attack will last one to four days and then subside. In rare severely affected patients, the gallbladder wall may rupture (perforate) or pus may build up within the gallbladder (empyema). In these patients, surgery may be necessary.
Acute Acalculous Cholecystitis (AAC)
AAC is generally distinguishable from calculous cholecystitis because it usually occurs in association with other serious conditions requiring hospital admission.  As in calculous cholecystitis patients, AAC often presents with pain in the upper right quadrant of the abdomen that radiates into the back. It is also characterized by fever, nausea, and vomiting. Increased white blood cell count (leukocytosis), decreased intestinal muscle contraction (paralytic ileus), gallbladder abscess and/or gangrene are all signs of AAC. A palpable mass or Murphy’s sign are sometimes present. Nonspecific symptoms include diarrhea, upset stomach, fatigue, altered mental status, and jaundice.
Hemorrhagic AAC has been reported in patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD).

