Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis

synonyms:
ADEMADE

overview:
Summary

Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) is a neurological, immune-mediated disorder in which widespread inflammation of the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) damages tissue known as white matter. White matter is composed of nerve fibers that are covered by a collection of fats and proteins known as myelin. Myelin, also called the myelin sheath, protects the nerve fibers, acts as an insulator and increases the speed of transmission of nerve signals. Damage to the myelin sheath (demyelination) affects the ability of the nerves to transmit information and can potentially cause a wide range of neurological symptoms.
The most common neurological symptoms of ADEM include arm/leg weakness, seizures, numbness or tingling, changes in mental status and vision loss; however, the specific symptoms and severity can vary between individuals. Onset can be at any age, but children are more likely to be affected than adults. Long-term outcomes for patients are generally favorable. The exact cause of ADEM is unknown, but it is thought to be associated with an autoimmune response that is triggered by an infection or, in rare instances, certain vaccinations.

symptoms:
Symptoms of ADEM can present within days to weeks following an infection. In a subset of patients, there is no identifiable infectious “trigger” for ADEM. Most commonly, ADEM occurs only once in a particular individual, meaning the disease is most often considered a monophasic disorder; however, a small percentage of patients may exhibit future attacks of ADEM (termed multiphasic ADEM).
The extent and progression of ADEM symptoms vary between affected individuals and may depend on the location of the brain lesions and the age of onset. Some individuals may have a mild, limited form of the disorder, while others may develop more severe symptoms. In the most severe cases, life-threatening complications such as respiratory failure is possible.
Initial symptoms usually develop rapidly and are common to many different illnesses, such as the flu. These symptoms are considered nonspecific and include headache, fever, irritability, fatigue, lethargy and a general feeling of ill health (malaise). Nausea and vomiting may be present and lead to unintended weight loss. Confusion, stupor and delirium may also occur, and severely affected patients may fall into a coma.
Additional neurological symptoms include the inability to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia), weakness of the arms and/or legs, slurred speech, cranial nerve dysfunction, numbness of the body and seizures. Seizures are more common in children than adults, typically occurring in children under five years of age. Inflammation of the optic nerve(s) (optic neuritis) may develop along with ADEM and result in vision loss.
Adults with ADEM may exhibit peripheral nerve damage (neuropathy). Individuals with neuropathy can experience weakness, pain, numbness or a burning or tingling sensation in the extremities and they typically have a worse prognosis. In some people, additional symptoms may develop including involuntary movements, amnesia, personality changes and depression. This appears to be a rare occurrence in children. Rarely, ataxia has been reported in patients who had ADEM following a Sars-Cov-2 infection. It is important to diagnose and treat ADEM associated with Sars-Cov-2 early to prevent poor outcomes.
Acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis (AHL) is thought to be a severe, hyperacute form of ADEM. This variant is associated with rapid onset of fever, headaches, vomiting, neck stiffness and seizures. It may involve the neurological signs and symptoms associated with ADEM. AHL is often associated with rapid deterioration and life-threatening complications such as swelling of the brain (brain edema). Despite the severe, rapid course of AHL, some individuals have had a favorable neurological outcome when treated quickly and aggressively.

