Acute Eosinophilic Pneumonia

synonyms:
AEPIAEPidiopathic acute eosinophilic pneumonia

overview:
Summary

Acute eosinophilic pneumonia (AEP) is a rare disorder characterized by the rapid accumulation of eosinophils in the lungs (pulmonary eosinophilia). Eosinophils are a type of white blood cell and are part of the immune system. They are usually produced in response to allergens, inflammation or infection (especially parasitic ones) and are particularly active in the respiratory tract. Common symptoms associated with AEP include progressive shortness of breath (dyspnea) of rapid onset and possibly acute respiratory failure, cough, fatigue, night sweats, fever, and unintended weight loss. The exact cause of the disorder is unknown (idiopathic) in many patients, however, recent change in tobacco smoking habits and drug intake can trigger the disease. Outcome is favorable with corticosteroids, without relapse.

Introduction

AEP was first described as a distinct entity in the medical literature in 1989. AEP is classified as a form of eosinophilic lung disease, a large group of interstitial lung diseases. AEP is different from chronic eosinophilic pneumonia (CEP), which is marked by slower progression, lack of progression to acute respiratory failure, frequent relapses and is often associated with asthma. For more information on CEP, choose “chronic eosinophilic pneumonia” as your search term in the NORD Rare Disease Database.

symptoms:
AEP is characterized by a sudden, rapid onset of symptoms usually within 1-7 days. However, in some cases, symptoms may develop less rapidly over the course of up to one month. AEP often develops in young, otherwise healthy individuals. Associated symptoms are nonspecific and can include fever, cough, difficulty breathing (dyspnea) and chest pain. Less common symptoms include fatigue, muscle pain (myalgia), joint aches, and abdominal discomfort or pain.
AEP can rapidly progress to acute respiratory failure. Acute respiratory failure occurs when the level of oxygen in the blood decreases severely (hypoxemia), potentially resulting in life-threatening breathing complications. This can occur within a few days or even within hours in individuals with AEP. Approximately two-thirds of individuals may require mechanical ventilation.
AEP is an extremely rare disorder and may be confused with infectious pneumonia, especially in the absence of differential cell count on bronchoalveolar lavage. As AEP becomes better known and more affected individuals are identified, researchers should be able to obtain a better clinical understanding of the disorder. For example, some researchers believe that milder cases of AEP exist, but may go undiagnosed as they can improve spontaneously. These mild cases may cause less severe symptoms and complications.

