Adams-Oliver Syndrome

synonyms:
limb scalp and skull defectsAOScongenital scalp defects with distal limb anomaliescongenital scalp defects with distal limb reduction anomalieslimb, scalp, and skull defectsAdams Oliver syndrome

overview:
Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) is a rare inherited condition present at birth that involves changes to the limbs and scalp. Symptoms may include areas of missing skin on the scalp, limb abnormalities, heart defects, neurological concerns, and issues with the eyes. AOS is caused by harmful changes (mutations) in theARHGAP31,DLL4,DOCK6,EOGT,NOTCH1, orRBPJgenes. Some people with AOS do not have a mutation in one of these genes AOS has different inheritance patterns based on the gene involved. Mutations in these genes can follow either an autosomal dominant or recessive inheritance pattern. There is no cure for AOC. However, it can be managed by monitoring for and treating the symptoms. This is typically done by several different healthcare providers such as pediatricians, cardiologists, and plastic surgeons.

symptoms:
People with AOS may have the following symptoms: absence of areas of skin (aplasia cutis congenita); shortened or missing fingers, hands, toes and/or feet; heart problems present at birth; neurological concerns such as developmental delays and learning disabilities; kidney issues and eye problems.
Symptoms can vary widely based on the gene involved. The most common symptom of AOC is an absence of areas of skin, which most commonly occurs around the scalp but can occur in other parts of the body. It can range from mild to severe. These areas of absent skin will often heal without treatment a couple of months after birth. However, in severely affected patients, there is a greater chance for infection, excessive bleeding (hemorrhage), seizures, high pressure within the skull (brain herniation) and cerebrospinal fluid leakage.
In about 20% of patients, there may be long-lasting enlarged small blood vessels. This can create a marbled-like appearance on the skin. These fragile dilated blood vessels may bleed. In severely affected patients, there may be an issue with the skull due to a bone defect that causes areas of absent bone. This can lead to excessive bleeding and bacterial infections.
Infants with AOS may have changes of the fingers, toes, hands and/or feet. Some infants may have very short fingers and/or toes. In severely affected patients, the fingers, toes, hands, feet and/or lower legs may be partially or completely missing. Also, there may be webbing of the toes (syndactyly) and/or underdeveloped toenails. In general, the lower half of the body (i.e., lower legs, feet, and toes) is more severely affected.
About 23% of people with AOS have structural heart problems. These include incomplete development of the left side of the heart (hypoplastic left ventricle) or a hole in the heart (septal defects) that affects how the blood flows. Also, patients can experience high blood pressure in the arteries of the lungs (pulmonary hypertension).
Around 35% of people with AOS have problems with brain development such as a much smaller head than expected (microcephaly), sac-like protrusion of the brain (encephalocele), and structural issues in the brain that can lead to epilepsy and seizures. These can be associated with developmental and intellectual problems.
Less than 10% of people with AOS experience eye problems which may include clouding of the lens of the eyes (cataracts), eye misalignment (esotropia), and decline of the optic nerve (optic atrophy).
Other symptoms such as a hole in the lip or roof of the mouth and extra nipples occur rarely in patients with AOS.

