ADCY5-Related Dyskinesia

synonyms:
dyskinesia with orofacial involvement

overview:
Summary
ADCY5-related dyskinesia is a rare neurological disorder characterized by various movement abnormalities. People with this condition have dyskinesia, a movement disorder characterized by trouble controlling voluntary movements, which are movements that a person does intentionally, such as lifting their arms, walking, or turning their heads. Instead, they experience uncontrolled, involuntary movements like sudden jerks, writhing motions, twitches, twisting, or tremors. These movements typically affect the arms, legs, neck and face.
Symptoms can begin in babies, young children or teenagers and continue throughout life, though there can be periods without symptoms (remission). The severity varies greatly from one person to another, but intelligence and life span are generally unaffected. This condition is caused by a change (variant) in theADCY5gene.
The disease-causing variant may be inherited from a parent, or it may occur spontaneously as a new variant without a previous family history (de novo).
Treatment is symptomatic and supportive.

symptoms:
The core symptoms include a hyperkinetic movement disorder (dystonia, chorea, myoclonus and/or tremor) that can be temporary (paroxysmal), permanent or, typically, a combination of both. However, much about ADCY5-related dyskinesia is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified patients, the lack of large clinical studies and the possibility of other genes or additional factors influencing the disorder, prevent physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all the symptoms discussed below.
All people affected with this disease have abnormal, uncontrolled movements, especially in the arms, legs, face, or neck with onset that usually occurs during infancy, childhood or throughout the teen-aged years. These movements can be:
Choreiform, which are continuous rapid, jerky, and sometimes writhing movementsMyoclonic, which are rapid, brief muscle contractions causing sudden jerky or twitching movementsDystonic, which are sustained and sometimes repetitive muscle contractions leading to muscle spasms and abnormal postures
Movements can occur throughout the day and night, disrupting sleep and causing daytime fatigue and often worsen with voluntary actions, anxiety, stress, tiredness, excitement, inactivity, or illness. Some movements can be painful, while others are not.
Babies and young children may have the following signs and symptoms:
Poor muscle tone (hypotonia) particularly affecting the trunk, which is all the body except for the head and arms and legs (axial hypotonia) making them seem “floppy”Swallowing difficulty (dysphagia)Severe irritabilityDevelopmental delays that become evident as the affected infants and children age and may include:Delays in attaining developmental milestones especially motor milestones like crawling, sitting up, or walking because of the abnormal movementsIn severely affected patients, abnormal movements may make walking extremely difficult requiring assistance to walk or use of an ambulatory device such as a wheelchairMildly affected people may have minor problems walking, but may appear a little clumsySome affected people can walk but have a slow, uncoordinated manner of walking (abnormal gait), while others may fall frequently
Axial hypotonia improves with age. Although, in some people, residual low muscle tone affecting the neck (cervical hypotonia) can remain. Cervical hypotonia can cause the head to droop or hang toward the chest (neck flexion).
Other signs and symptoms include:
Facial twitchingMild abnormal movements including those of facial muscles can result in frustration or awkwardness in social situationsFacial twitching usually involves the muscles around the eyes and mouthFacial twitching in infants and young children can sometimes lead to delays in attaining speech and/or difficulty being understood due to poor articulation of words (dysarthria)Difficulty staring at a fixed object (gaze impersistence)Oculomotor apraxia, in which there are problems moving the eyes voluntarily
The disease is typically non-progressive. Symptoms can be continuous or episodic, lasting from seconds to hours, and can change over time. Some affected people have long periods of remission, while others see their symptoms improve during middle age.
There have been reports of heart abnormalities and possible neuropsychiatric issues like depression, anxiety and psychosis. These issues may be coincidental or part of the condition. More research is needed to fully understand these possible complications.

