Addison’s Disease

synonyms:
chronic adrenocortical insufficiencyprimary adrenal insufficiencyprimary failure adrenocortical insufficiency

overview:
Summary
Addison’s disease is a rare disorder characterized by inadequate production of the steroid hormones cortisol and aldosterone by the two outer layers of cells of the adrenal glands (adrenal cortex). The symptoms of classic Addison’s disease, also known as primary adrenal insufficiency, result from the insufficient production of these two hormones, cortisol and aldosterone. Major symptoms include fatigue, gastrointestinal abnormalities, and changes in skin color (pigmentation). Behavior and mood changes may also occur in some individuals with Addison’s disease. Increased excretion of water and low blood pressure (hypotension) can lead to extremely low concentrations of water in the body (dehydration). The symptoms of Addison’s usually develop slowly, but sometimes can develop rapidly, a serious condition called acute adrenal failure. In most cases, Addison’s disease occurs when the body’s immune system mistakenly attacks the adrenal glands causing slowly progressive damage to the adrenal cortex.

symptoms:
The symptoms of Addison’s disease can vary from one individual to another. Symptoms usually develop slowly over time and are usually vague and common to many conditions (nonspecific). This often leads to delays in the proper diagnosis of Addison’s disease. In rare cases, the symptoms of Addison’s disease can develop rapidly causing a condition called acute adrenal failure.
Fatigue is the most common symptom of Addison’s disease. Another common initial symptom of Addison’s disease is the development of patches of skin that are darker than the surrounding skin (hyperpigmentation). This discoloration most commonly occurs near scars, by skin creases such as the knuckles, and on the mucous membranes such as the gums. Skin abnormalities can precede the development of other symptoms by months or years, but do not occur in every person.
Some individuals with Addison’s disease may also develop a condition called vitiligo in which white patches may appear on different areas of the body. This may vary from one or two small spots on the skin or multiple, larger affected areas. Black freckles may develop on the forehead, face or shoulders in some cases.
A variety of gastrointestinal symptoms may be present including nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Diarrhea is less common, but may also occur. Affected individuals may have a poor appetite and unintentional weight loss and may develop progressive fatigue and muscle weakness. Muscle pain (myalgia), muscle spasms and joint pain may also occur. Dehydration can also affect individuals with Addison’s disease.
An additional symptom that may occur is low blood pressure (hypotension), which can cause lightheadedness or dizziness upon standing. Temporary loss of consciousness (syncope) can occur in some cases. Addison’s disease can also lead to changes in emotion and behavior. The disorder has been associated with irritability, depression, and poor concentration.
Individuals with Addison’s disease may have cravings for salt or salty foods and low blood sugar (glucose) levels. Women with Addison’s disease may have irregular menstrual periods, lose body hair and have a decreased sexual drive.
In some cases, symptoms of Addison’s disease may appear suddenly, a condition called acute adrenal failure or an addisonian crisis. During an addisonian crisis, affected individuals may develop a sudden loss of strength; severe pain in the lower back, abdomen or legs; vomiting and diarrhea potentially causing dehydration; and low blood pressure and loss of consciousness. An addisonian crisis is a medical emergency that can cause life-threatening complications such as shock or kidney failure if not treated. A crisis is usually set off when affected individuals are under stress such as during an accident, trauma, surgery or severe infection.

