Adenylosuccinate Lyase Deficiency

synonyms:
adenylosuccinase deficiencysuccinylpurinemic autismADSL deficiency

overview:
Summary
Adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency is an inherited metabolic disorder that is characterized into three categories (fatal neonatal form, type I and type II), each of which has a specific age of onset and severity of symptoms. Individuals with this disorder may have symptoms such as slowing of thought and physical movement, seizures, muscle weakness and may exhibit behaviors associated with autism. This syndrome has been diagnosed in individuals around the world and its incidence is not yet known.
Introduction
Adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency (ASLD) is a rare, inherited metabolic disorder caused by a genetic change which lowers the effectiveness of the enzyme adenylosuccinate lyase (ASL). The disorder causes the buildup of two chemicals in body fluids (such as cerebrospinal fluid, plasma, and urine) that aren’t normally seen in healthy individuals. These two chemicals are succinylaminoimidazole carboxamide riboside (SAICA riboside) and succinyladenosine. The symptoms and the physical findings associated with ASLD vary greatly from person to person. People with ASLD can have a mix of neurological symptoms such as:
Slowing of thought and physical movement (psychomotor impairment)Features commonly associated with autism, such as repetitive behaviors and failure to make eye contactEpilepsyProgressive loss of muscle tissue (muscle wasting)Difficulty eating and drinking due to the issues described above (secondary feeding problems)Weakness in the trunk of the body (axial hypotonia) with increased strength and muscle mass in the limbs (peripheral hypertonia). This only occurs in severe ADSL deficiency.
Differences in body structure that are specifically related to this disorder (dysmorphic features) are not common. However, when they do occur, they are usually subtle and may include slowed growth, skull differences such as a small head circumference (microcephaly) or flattened back of the head (flat occiput), occasional deviation of the eye (intermittent divergent strabismus), small nose with anteverted nostrils, long and smooth philtrum, thin upper lip and low set ears.
Adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency is categorized as a purine biosynthesis disorder. Purines are nucleotides that play vital roles in the cells, particularly in the process of building up or breaking down complex chemicals (intermediary metabolism) and in providing energy for cellular activity (energy-transforming reactions). Purines also serve as building blocks of nucleic acids and thus participate in molecular mechanisms by which genetic information is stored. Biosynthesis is how an organism makes different molecules and is often used to describe the synthesis of molecules that are particularly important for the organism to survive. ASLD changes the body’s ability to make these important purines. Researchers are still debating how these genetic and molecular mechanisms cause the symptoms seen in people with ASLD.

symptoms:
Three categories of adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency have been recognized. The first is the fatal neonatal form, where babies have encephalopathy with lack of spontaneous movement, respiratory failure and intractable seizures. There may be some prenatal indications such as the fetus being small in size (IUGR), having a small head (microcephaly), a low level of fetal movement (hypokinesia) and a loss of fetal heart rate variability.
Adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency type I (ASLD-I), the severe childhood form, is only associated with neurological differences. These may include severe slowing of thought and movement (psychomotor impairment), epilepsy, low muscle tone in the trunk of the body (axial hypotonia) with normal tendon reflexes and features associated with autism including absent or poor eye contact, stereotypies, tantrums, agitation and a tendency toward turning aggression onto oneself.
Patients with type II adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency (ASLD-II) have mild to moderate clinical features in comparison. They may have slight to moderate psychomotor impairment, show temporary changes in hearing and vision (transient auditory and visual contact disturbance), but do not have epilepsy.

