Adie Syndrome

synonyms:
Adie's PupilAdie's SyndromeAdie's Tonic PupilHolmes-Adie Syndrometonic pupil syndrome

overview:
Adie syndrome, or Holmes-Adie syndrome, is a rare neurological disorder affecting the pupil of the eye. In most patients the pupil is larger than normal (dilated) and slow to react in response to direct light. Absent or poor tendon reflexes are also associated with this disorder. In most individuals, the cause is unknown (idiopathic), but Adie syndrome can occur as due to other conditions such as trauma, surgery, lack of blood flow (ischemia) or infection. In rare cases localized disturbance of sweat secretion is associated with Adie syndrome (Ross syndrome). Adie syndrome involves a usually non progressive and limited damage to the autonomic nervous system, which is the portion of the nervous system that controls or regulates certain involuntary body functions including the reaction of the pupils to stimuli.
The term Adie syndrome is used when both abnormalities of the pupil and loss of deep tendon reflexes are present. However, these findings may not develop at the same time. When only abnormalities affecting the pupil are present, the disorder may be referred to as Adie’s pupil, Adie’s tonic pupil or, most commonly, tonic pupil. When a person’s pupils are of unequal size, the term anisocoria may be used.

symptoms:
Normally the pupil gets smaller (constricts) in the presence of light or when focusing on nearby objects. The pupil normally opens wider (dilates) in dim light or darkness, when focusing on far away objects, or when a person is excited.
In most patients with Adie syndrome the affected pupil is larger than normal (dilated) all the time and does not constrict very much or not at all in response to direct light. In many cases it is not ideally round but slightly ovally distorted. The pupil will constrict slowly when focusing (=accommodating) on objects close at hand (normally referred to as near response). If the pupil is observed with a loupe or microscope a typical behavior can be observed both spontaneously or during near response: Some sectors of the sphincter muscles constrict and others don’t. This reminds of the movement of an earthworm. Eventually, after months or years, the pupil, which was initially larger than the unaffected pupil, will become smaller than the unaffected pupil. When no longer focusing on the close at hand object, the affected pupil may remain smaller than normal or grow larger (re-dilate) at an abnormally slow rate, sometimes taking as long as several minutes to return to its original (i.e. dilated) size. Some individuals may not have symptoms associated with the affected pupil. Sometimes blurry vision or sensitivity to bright lights (photophobia) can occur.
Individuals with Adie syndrome have absent or poor (sluggish) deep tendon reflexes as well. Deep tendon reflexes are involuntary muscle contractions that occur to a sudden stimulus. For example, the patellar reflex occurs in the area just below the kneecap (patella). A physician may tap this area with a small rubber hammer, which should cause the lower leg to kick out; in individuals with Adie syndrome this reflex response is poor or does not occur.
Headache, facial pain, or emotional fluctuations may occur in some patients. The disorder does not ordinarily cause severe disability. Adie syndrome usually affects the pupil of one eye, although the other eye may eventually become affected as well.
There have been some reports in the medical literature that individuals with Adie syndrome may experience other abilities of autonomic function such as issues with cardiovascular function.

