Adult-Onset Leukoencephalopathy with Axonal Spheroids and Pigmented Glia

synonyms:
hereditary diffuse leukoencephalopathy with spheroids (HDLS)leukoencephalopathy, diffuse hereditary, with spheroidsadult-onset leukodystrophy with neuroaxonal spheroidsautosomal dominant leukoencephalopathy with neuroaxonal spheroidsneuroaxonal leukodystrophypigmentary orthochromatic leukodystrophy (POLD)CSF1R-related leukoencephalopathyALSPCSF1R-related adult-onset leukoencephalopathy with axonal spheroids and pigmented gliaCSF1R-related ALSP

overview:
Summary

Adult-onset leukoencephalopathy with axonal spheroids and pigmented glia (ALSP) is a rare, progressive neurological disease that causes brain tissue known as white matter to waste away (leukodystrophy), forming lesions in certain brain areas due to disease-causing variants in theCSF1R(colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor) gene. ALSP is one type of leukodystrophy disorder, estimated by some studies to account for 10 to 25% of adult-onset leukodystrophies. Lesions of this white matter lead to major changes in personality, thinking (cognition), and muscle function, eventually causing people with this disorder to develop dementia and later decline into a vegetative state. Aside from the presence of a specific gene variant, the brains of people with ALSP show characteristic microscopic changes and patterns of atrophy on brain imaging that distinguish ALSP patients from those with other neurological conditions. Symptoms of ALSP overlap with frontotemporal dementia and other disorders associated with dementia such as Alzheimer disease as well as other neurological disorders such as Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis, schizophrenia and several others, making diagnosis difficult unless genetic testing is done. Symptoms can vary considerably from one person with ALSP to the next (even in the same family). Currently, brain biopsy is not necessary for diagnosis because genetic testing is available.

Introduction

ALSP was previously known as two separate disorders: hereditary diffuse leukoencephalopathy with spheroids (HDLS) and pigmentary orthochromatic leukodystrophy (POLD). Once both disorders were linked toCSF1Rgene variants, they became known as ALSP.

symptoms:
Early symptoms of ALSP often include mild psychological or cognitive changes, but, while rare, can present as disturbances in motor function, such as difficulty walking, falling, and slowness of movements. Eventually, as damage in the brain becomes more extensive, psychological, cognitive and motor symptoms exist together. Initial symptoms and rate of disease progression vary quite a bit from one individual to the next, including those within the same family when the condition is inherited.
Psychiatric features of ALSP include changes in personality and the development of anxiety, depression, lack of interest in things (apathy), irritability, distractibility, socially inappropriate behaviors (disinhibition) and cravings for certain types of food (for example eating only ice cream). Cognitive features include the development of dementia, with a general decline in mental functioning, including memory loss, word-finding and language difficulties (aphasia), difficulty planning voluntary muscle movements (apraxia), poor attention, poor judgment and problem solving and reduced impulse control.
Brain degeneration in ALSP also affects what is known as the pyramidal system in the brain. These are nerve tracts that travel from the cerebral cortex (responsible for control of voluntary movements) to the brainstem or the spinal cord. Damage to these tracts in ALSP causes overactive reflexes (hyperreflexia); increased muscle tone, meaning muscles stay stiff and contracted at rest (hypertonicity); muscle spasms with increased movement (spasticity); weakness of one side of the body (hemiparesis) or in all four limbs (quadriparesis); reduced coordination; changes in vision; difficulty walking; difficulty swallowing; slurred speech; and heightened emotional responses, meaning patients may cry or laugh at inappropriate times (pseudobulbar palsy).
Symptoms similar to Parkinson’s disease, such as increased muscle stiffness (rigidity), tremors, a slowing of movement (bradykinesia), a shuffling gait and a reduction or loss of facial expression (hypomimic face or masked facies) can occur in ALSP as well. In ALSP, these symptoms are referred to as Parkinsonism and are not helped by increasing dopamine levels with medications like levodopa, which would ordinarily improve symptoms in Parkinson’s disease.
Changes to sensory nerves can also occur, making it more difficult for patients to sense pain, touch, vibration and changes in body position. Frequently, the patients cannot recognize the right or left side of the body.
Less commonly, seizures can accompany ALSP, occurring in approximately 30% of patients with the diagnosis. The seizures usually occur at the onset of the illness.
As the disease worsens, patients enter a state where they can no longer walk or speak and need total care with all daily living functions. They also lose control of bladder and bowel sphincter functions (double incontinent).  Most patients with ALSP die from pneumonia.

