Adult-Onset Still’s Disease

synonyms:
adult Still's diseaseAOSDWissler-Fanconi syndrome

overview:
Summary
Adult-onset Still’s disease (AOSD) is a rare inflammatory disorder that can affect the entire body (systemic disease). The cause of the disorder is unknown (idiopathic). Affected individuals may develop episodes of high, spiking fevers, a pink or salmon colored rash, joint pain, muscle pain, a sore throat and other symptoms associated with systemic inflammatory disease. The specific symptoms and frequency of episodes vary from one person to another and the progression of the disorder is difficult to predict. In some individuals, the disorder appears suddenly, disappears almost as quickly and may not return. In other people, AOSD is a chronic, potentially disabling condition. Various anti-inflammatory medications are used to treat individuals with AOSD, and affected individuals may respond to therapy differently.
Introduction
Adult-onset Still’s disease is the adult form of systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (juvenile Still’s disease). These disorders are named after Sir George Frederic Still, a British physician who first described a form of childhood arthritis associated with fever in the medical literature in 1896. Adults with “Still’s disease” were first reported in the medial literature in 1971, but cases that fit the description of the disorder appear as early as the late 1800s. AOSD might be difficult to diagnose given its rarity and the fact that symptoms may overlap with other diseases. Making a timely and accurate diagnosis is important for appropriate patient care and counseling. Although the symptoms of AOSD can affect quality of life, especially if they are chronic, the disease is not usually life -threatening.

symptoms:
The symptoms, progression, and severity of AOSD are highly variable from one person to another, but three main patterns have been identified:
Monophasic pattern: patients with monophasic AOSD have a single episode of symptoms that typically lasts weeks to months, but usually less than a year.
Polyphasic (intermittent) pattern: patients with polyphasic AOSD develop more than one episode of symptoms. Affected individuals are usually symptom-free for weeks to years between episodes. In general, subsequent episodes tend to be less severe and shorter in duration compared to the initial one.
Chronic pattern: patients with chronic AOSD have persistent symptoms over time.
Most individuals with AOSD develop some combination of the symptoms normally associated with systemic inflammatory disease. These include a spiking fever, a skin rash, muscle pain (myalgia), and joint pain (arthralgia) and inflammation (arthritis). The fever seen in AOSD is typically greater than 102.2oF (39oC). In some patients, fever spikes occur once or twice a day, usually in the late afternoon or early evening. The rash of AOSD, which usually but not always develops during a fever episode, is pink or salmon colored. It mostly affects the chest and thighs, but can also affect the arms, legs and face. It may or may not be itchy (pruritic) and tends to disappear quickly (evanescent). Affected joints may become swollen, stiff and inflamed. The knees, wrists, ankles, and hips are most commonly affected. Muscle and joint pain can be intense and is often worse during a fever episode. If AOSD goes untreated, chronic inflammation of the joints can potentially result in destruction of the affected joints. Chronic joint inflammation leading to these complications is more common in chronic AOSD and can potentially cause long-term, severe and disabling complications. Other symptoms that can be seen in AOSD include a sore throat, abdominal pain, nausea, loss of appetite (anorexia), weight loss and enlargement of the spleen (splenomegaly), liver (hepatomegaly) and lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy).
More rarely, AOSD can cause inflammation of internal organs. In some patients, the thin, sac-like membrane that surrounds the heart (pericardium) or the heart muscle (myocardium) may become inflamed (pericarditis or myocarditis, respectively). The membrane lining the lungs may also become inflamed (pleuritis) and may cause fluid to accumulate around the lungs (pleural effusion). Heart and lung involvement can cause difficulty breathing and chest pain, but in most patients it is usually not severe enough to be readily apparent and is often only detected by imaging. Another rare but potentially dangerous complication of AOSD is macrophage activation syndrome (MAS), also called secondary hemophagocytic lymphohystiocytosis (HLH), a condition characterized by an overactive and abnormal response of the immune system (for more information on this disorder, choose “HLH” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database).

