Adult Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis

synonyms:
adult NCLANCLKufs syndromeKufs diseaseParry diseaseneuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, adult type

overview:
Summary

Adult neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (ANCL) is a general term for several rare genetic disorders that belong to a group of progressive, degenerative neurometabolic disorders known as the neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs). These disorders share certain similar symptoms and are distinguished in part by the age at which such symptoms appear. Onset of ANCL is usually around the age of 30, but these disorders can occur during the teen-aged years or in people more than 50 years old. The NCLs as a group are characterized by abnormal accumulation of certain fatty, granular substances (i.e., pigmented lipids [lipopigments] ceroid and lipofuscin) within nerve cells (neurons) of the brain as well as other tissues of the body. This is accompanied by progressive deterioration (atrophy) of certain areas of the brain, neurological impairment, and other characteristic symptoms and physical findings. ANCL is sometimes called Kufs disease. Historically, Kufs disease was broken down into type A or type B. The ANCLs are caused by changes (mutations) in different genes and can have different signs and symptoms.

Introduction

Before the identification of the underlying genes, the neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses or NCLs were broken down by age of onset. Kufs disease was the name for the adult onset form. However, many researchers now feel that it is more appropriate to classify these disorders based upon the gene that is affected rather than by age of onset. Several genes that are known to cause neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses can have the onset of symptoms in adulthood.

symptoms:
ANCL or Kufs disease was generally broken down into type A and type B. The signs and symptoms of these two subtypes often overlap and the distinction between the two is not always clear. Symptoms typically become worse over time. Generally, type A is associated with progressive myoclonic epilepsy (PME). PME is a condition characterized by both muscle contractions (myoclonus) and seizures (epilepsy). Some individuals experience difficulties in coordinating voluntary movements (ataxia) or difficulty speaking (dysarthria).
Type B often has similar symptoms to type A. However, individuals may also experience abnormalities of movement and coordination including ataxia and involuntary movements such as tics or tremors, including those affecting the face (facial dyskinesia). Some individuals develop a decline in intellectual and cognitive ability (dementia) and changes in behavior and other psychiatric abnormalities. Seizures are rare in type B, but can occur.
More recently, disease has been described that begins in adulthood with vision loss but may not have further symptoms.

