Adult Polyglucosan Body Disease

synonyms:
APBDpolyglucosan body disease, adult form

overview:
Summary

Adult polyglucosan body disease (APBD) is a rare, genetic disorder characterized by a deficiency of glycogen-branching enzyme, resulting in the accumulation of polyglucosan bodies in muscle, nerve and various other tissues of the body. Polyglucosan bodies are composed of large, complex, sugar-based molecules. APBD may be characterized by dysfunction of the central and peripheral nervous systems. The central nervous system (CNS) refers to the brain and spinal cord. The peripheral nerves extend from the CNS to muscles, glands, skin, sensory organs, and internal organs. Peripheral nerves include motor nerves; sensory nerves; and nerves of the autonomic nervous system, which are involved in involuntary body functions. In individuals with APBD, associated symptoms and findings may include sensory loss in the legs; progressive muscle weakness of the arms and legs; walking (gait) disturbances; progressive urinary difficulties; occasionally mild cognitive impairment or dementia; deficiencies in the autonomic nervous system; and/or other abnormalities. APBD is caused by mutations in the glycogen branching enzyme gene (GBE1) and is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.

Introduction

APBD was first described in the medical literature as a clinical entity in 1980 (Robitaille Y et. al). The mutation that causes the disorder is in the same gene that causes Andersen’s disease (glycogen storage disease type IV), a severe liver disorder that affects infants. The only difference is that in Andersen’s disease, GBE is completely dysfunctional, whereas in APBD it retains some residual activity.

symptoms:
Symptoms and severity can vary greatly from one person to another. Typically, symptoms develop around the fifth decade of life. The initial sign is many times related to neurogenic bladder: specifically, an increased need to urinate that may eventually progress to cause a near complete loss of bladder control (urinary incontinence). In some cases, urinary difficulties may precede other symptoms by one or two decades.
Another common early sign of APBD disease is a feeling of numbness or weakness in the hands and feet (paresthesia). Affected individuals may experience an inability to lift the front part of the foot (foot drop), which results in the need to drag the front of the foot on the ground when walking. Affected individuals may experience weakness in the arms and legs. Eventually, affected individuals may develop progressively increased muscle tone and stiffness of the legs (spasticity), causing difficulty walking. Most individuals may eventually need assistance walking (e.g., cane or walker), and ultimately the use of a wheelchair may be required.
Some affected individuals may develop mild cognitive impairment, most commonly, mild attention and memory deficits. In some cases, cognitive problems may worsen, resulting in progressive loss of memory and intellectual abilities (dementia).

