African Iron Overload

synonyms:
African siderosisBantu siderosis

overview:
Summary
African iron overload is a rare disorder characterized abnormally elevated levels of iron in the body. The name originates from the initial description of this entity in sub-Saharan Africa, in communities where affected individuals drink a traditional, homemade beer that contains a high amount of iron. Symptoms may vary from case to case but can include the accumulation of fibrous tissue (fibrosis) in the liver and, eventually, scarring of the liver (cirrhosis). The exact cause of African iron overload is unknown, but researchers believe that a combination of dietary and genetic factors result in the development of the disorder.
Introduction
Researches originally believed that the popular, iron-rich beer caused cases of African iron overload. However, many individuals that drank the beer did not develop the disorder and some individuals that did not drink the beer did develop it. This led researchers to speculate that a mutation of a gene or genes involved in the transport or breakdown (metabolism) of iron must play a role in the development of African iron overload. Such a gene has not yet been identified.

symptoms:
The symptoms of African iron overload can vary from one person to another. The disorder usually develops in middle-aged or older adults. Affected individuals often develop abnormal enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly). In more serious cases, the accumulation of fibrous tissue (fibrosis) in the main vein that supplies blood to the liver (portal vein) may result in high blood pressure in the this vein (portal hypertension). Abnormal fluid retention in the abdominal cavity can cause swelling (ascites). In some cases, scarring of the liver (cirrhosis) and, potentially, liver failure may eventually occur.
Additional symptoms have been reported to occur in association with African iron overload depending upon the extent of and exact location of iron accumulation. For example, diabetes may occur because of iron accumulation in the pancreas, the small organ located behind the stomach that produces insulin. Diabetes is a common disorder in which the body does not produce enough or is unable to properly use insulin.
Additional conditions that have been associated with African iron overload include bone thinning (osteoporosis), heart (cardiac) abnormalities, and an increased susceptibility to developing infections such as tuberculosis. Individuals with African iron overload are at a greater risk than the general population of developing esophageal cancer or a primary cancer of liver known as hepatocellular carcinoma.

