Aicardi Syndrome

synonyms:
agenesis of corpus callosum with chorioretinitis abnormalityagenesis of corpus callosum with infantile spasms and ocular anomaliescallosal agenesis and ocular abnormalitieschorioretinal anomalies with ACCcorpus callosum, agenesis of chorioretinal abnormality

overview:
Summary
Aicardi syndrome is an extremely rare genetic disorder. Almost all people with Aicardi syndrome are females. Individuals with Aicardi syndrome have agenesis of the corpus callosum, chorioretinal lacunae and seizures. Agenesis of the corpus callosum means that the structure that connects the right half of the brain with the left half of the brain (corpus callosum) does not develop normally. Chorioretinal lacunae are small holes in the retina (back part of the eye). These are only visible to a doctor using a device to look into the back of the eye. It is very unusual (maybe impossible) to have Aicardi syndrome without having chorioretinal lacunae. The seizures can be of different types. Infants with Aicardi syndrome usually have a type of seizure known as “infantile spasms”. These are single jerks of the whole body. They may happen many times a day. Infants are usually awake during infantile spasms. These seizures look different from the more common type of seizures known as “generalized tonic-clonic” seizures. Generalized tonic-clonic seizures are rhythmic jerking of arms and legs. People often black out during this type of seizure. Children with Aicardi syndrome usually grow out of infantile spasms and then have generalized tonic-clonic or other types of seizures. Other parts of the brain also do not develop normally. These brain malformations cause frequent seizures and intellectual disability.

symptoms:
Aicardi syndrome typically begins as involuntary muscle spasms between four months and four years of age. Other symptoms may include epilepsy, intellectual disability, profound muscle weakness (hypotonia), abnormally small eyes (microphthalmia), an incomplete development of the retina and nerve in the back of the eye (colobomas) and/or abnormalities of the ribs and/or spinal vertebral bones. In addition to the agenesis of the corpus callosum, imaging of the brain (by brain MRI) usually shows cysts in the brain as well as clumps of nerve cells that are in the wrong location (heterotopias). Children of all ages with Aicardi syndrome have significant delays in motor development. Aicardi syndrome can be life-threatening during childhood due to prolonged seizures and complications from upper respiratory infections.

