Aicardi-Goutières Syndrome

synonyms:
AGS

overview:
Summary
Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS) is a progressive disease of the brain (encephalopathy) that presents within the first year of life. Some of the signs of this syndrome are a small head (microcephaly), brain calcifications (basal ganglia and other locations), abnormalities in the white matter tracts of the brain, excess lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell) in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and increased chemical messengers (interferon-alpha) made by the immune system in the CSF and the blood. The immune system does not function normally and excess interferon is produced. These problems are thought to lead to disease in AGS.
Some children present as early as the first few weeks of life, but often children present in the first few years of life, after an initial period of normal development. As the disease progresses, infants may demonstrate skin sores or bumps (chilblains) on the toes, fingers and ears as well as with other rashes. Other organs, including the eyes (glaucoma), thyroid (hypothyroidism), lungs (pulmonary hypertension), heart (cardiomyopathy), liver (autoimmune hepatitis), muscle (myopathy) and joints (arthropathy) may become involved. Some infants presenting early in life may have an enlarged liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly), elevated liver enzymes and a low platelet count (thrombocytopenia) or other abnormalities of the blood cells, all of which may mimic a congenital infection.
Changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in several different genes are known to cause AGS. AGS is most commonly inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion (mother and father are both carriers for the harmful gene variant), but the disease can also result from ade novo(new) gene variant in the child or from autosomal dominant inheritance from one parent.

symptoms:
AGS is a disease that affects the white matter of the brain (leukoencephalopathy) and may result in severe intellectual and physical disability. Some infants will present variably in the first few weeks of life with irritability, fever, abnormal muscle contractions (dystonia), microcephaly, basal ganglia calcifications, white matter tract abnormalities, CSF lymphocytosis and elevated CSF interferon-alpha. However, infants and young children may also present after a period of normal development, in some cases following a period of unexplained fever or rash due to inflammation. As the disease progresses, individuals with AGS may present with chilblain skin lesions, most commonly on the fingers, toes and ears, or with other atypical rashes. Some infants with AGS may present with symptoms resembling a congenital infection which should be ruled out prior to diagnosis. These signs include hepatosplenomegaly, elevated liver enzymes and thrombocytopenia (low platelets). Such infections include toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, HIV or Zika virus infections. Multiple organ systems may become involved including the eyes (glaucoma and uveitis), endocrine (hypothyroidism, diabetes, diabetes insipidus, growth delay), cardiovascular (cardiomyopathy, pulmonary hypertension and other abnormalities), gastrointestinal (autoimmune hepatitis, inflammatory bowel disease), musculoskeletal (myopathy, neuropathy, arthropathy), renal (renal insufficiency) and hematologic (thrombocytopenia, anemia, leukopenia). Due to the significant neurologic involvement of AGS, affected individuals typically display muscular spasticity and dystonia, decreased muscular tone of their trunk (truncal hypotonia), poor head control, and seizures.
Two other clinical manifestations have been noted for specific subtypes of AGS. In patients who have a pathogenic variant of theSAMHD1gene,intracranial large-vessel disease and aneurysms have been noted. This can lead to blood vessel narrowing (stenosis) in the brain, causing decreased blood flow to certain brain regions. It can also cause bulges (aneurysms) to form in vessels due to weakness in their walls, which can rupture and cause bleeding (hemorrhage) into the brain. In patients who have a pathogenic variant of theADAR1gene, refractory four-limb dystonia has been noted. This manifestation typically begins between the ages of eight months and five years and presents as abnormal postures or movements of all four limbs.
Milder forms of AGS have also been described in patients with atypical pathogenic gene variants.

