AIDS Dysmorphic Syndrome

synonyms:
Dysmorphic Acquired Immune Deficiency SyndromeDysmorphic AIDSFetal Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS)Fetal AIDS InfectionFetal Effects of AIDSHIV EmbryopathyPerinatal AIDS

overview:
The term “AIDS dysmorphic syndrome” or “HIV embryopathy” has been used by some researchers to describe specific facial malformations (i.e., craniofacial dysmorphism), an unusually small head, and growth deficiency in some infants infected with HIV.* Such craniofacial abnormalities have included a prominent, boxlike forehead, large, wide eyes; a flattened nasal bridge, and an unusually pronounced philtrum, which is the vertical groove in the center of the upper lip.
However, many investigators have since questioned the significance of these observations. Such researchers indicate that there is lack of evidence for characteristic craniofacial malformations in infants who acquired HIV infection from their mother before, during, or shortly after birth (i.e., perinatally).
*HIV is the abbreviation for the human immunodeficiency virus, a retrovirus that infects certain white blood cells called helper T cells (CD4+ cells). HIV infection leads to progressive deterioration of the body’s immune system and causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).

symptoms:
Some researchers have reported particular craniofacial abnormalities, described as “AIDS dysmorphic syndrome” or “HIV embryopathy”, in some infants who acquired HIV infection from their mother (perinatally).  Such features have included a small head circumference (microcephaly); a prominent, boxlike forehead; a flattened nasal bridge and shortened nose; and/or an unusually pronounced vertical groove (philtrum) in the center of the upper lip. Various eye abnormalities have also been reported, such as unusually prominent and/or widely set eyes (ocular hypertelorism); slanting (obliquity) of the eyes; long eyelid folds (palpebral fissures); and/or an unusual bluish tint of the whites of the eyes (blue sclerae).  Affected infants and children also typically had growth retardation, resulting in low weight and height as compared to others of the same age and sex. In some cases, growth failure began during fetal development (intrauterine growth retardation).  Such features have varied in range and severity from case to case and have been noted prior to the development of symptoms associated with impaired functioning of the immune system (immunodeficiency).
However, as noted above, investigators have since cited a lack of evidence for characteristic craniofacial abnormalities in infants with perinatal HIV infection.  Rather, according to such researchers, evidence suggests that there is no significant difference in the incidence of such features in affected children compared with those in the general population.  In addition, although a significant number may have microcephaly and growth failure after birth, such abnormalities could be associated with chronic illnesses and progressive neurologic dysfunction (see below) due to HIV infection.  Investigators also note that the observed features in infants with perinatal HIV infection must be differentiated from findings that may be due to exposure to alcohol, certain drugs, or other factors during pregnancy.
Symptoms of immunodeficiency due to perinatal HIV infection may become apparent during the first or second year of life or later during childhood.  Common manifestations may include lung inflammation (lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis); recurring bacterial infections; chronic fungal infection of the mouth (oral candidiasis); abnormal enlargement of the liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly); generalized swelling of lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy); swelling of certain salivary glands; rashes; persistent fever; chronic diarrhea; and severe weight loss (wasting).  In addition, affected infants and children may develop chronic or recurrent infections with certain viruses, fungi, or other unusual opportunistic microorganisms. The term “opportunistic infections” refers to infections caused by microorganisms that usually do not cause disease in healthy individuals or to widespread (systemic) infection by microorganisms that typically cause only localized, mild infection. For example, affected infants and children may be prone to developing severe lung inflammation (pneumonia) due to infection with a microorganism known as Pneumocystis carinii, which may result in potentially life-threatening complications. Although uncommon, there may also be an increased risk of developing particular malignancies, such as certain cancers of the lymphatic system (e.g., non-Hodgkins B-cell lymphomas, brain lymphomas).
As noted above, many affected infants and children may also develop progressive neurologic dysfunction, which may include delays in or loss of previously acquired developmental milestones; intellectual deterioration; microcephaly; and motor dysfunction.  Various additional findings may also be present, including inflammation of the liver (hepatitis) and impaired functioning of the kidneys (renal failure) and the heart (heart failure).

