Alexander Disease

synonyms:
dysmyelogenic leukodystrophydysmyelogenic leukodystrophy-megalobarefibrinoid degeneration of astrocytesfibrinoid leukodystrophyhyaline panneuropathyleukodystrophy with rosenthal fibersmegalencephaly with hyaline inclusionmegalencephaly with hyaline panneuropathy

overview:
Summary
Alexander disease is an extremely rare, usually progressive and fatal, neurological disorder. Initially it was detected most often during infancy or early childhood, but as better diagnostic tools have become available has been found to occur with similar frequency at all stages of life. Alexander disease has historically been included among the leukodystrophies–diseases of the white matter of the brain. These diseases affect the fatty material (myelin) that forms an insulating wrapping (sheath) around certain nerve fibers (axons). Myelin enables the efficient transmission of nerve impulses and provides the “whitish” appearance of the so-called white matter of the brain. There is a marked deficit in myelin formation in most early onset patients with Alexander disease, and sometimes in later onset patients, particularly in the front (frontal lobes) of the brain’s two hemispheres (cerebrum). However, white matter defects are sometimes not observed in later onset individuals. Instead, the unifying feature among all Alexander disease patients is the presence of abnormal protein aggregates known as “Rosenthal fibers” throughout certain regions of the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system [CNS]). These aggregates occur inside astrocytes, a common cell type in the CNS that helps maintain a normal CNS environment. Accordingly, it is more appropriate to consider Alexander disease a disease of astrocytes (an astrogliopathy) than a white matter disease (leukodystrophy).
Introduction
Alexander disease is named after the physician who first described the condition in 1949 (WS Alexander).

symptoms:
Historically, three forms of Alexander disease have been described based on age of onset, Infantile, Juvenile and Adult; but an analysis of a large number of patients concluded that the disease is better described as having two forms, Type I, which generally has an onset by age 4, and Type II, which can have onset at any age, but primarily after age 4. Each type accounts for about half of the reported patients. Symptoms associated with the Type I form include a failure to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive); delays in the development of certain physical, mental, and behavioral skills that are typically acquired at particular stages (psychomotor impairment); and sudden episodes of uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain (seizures). Additional features typically include progressive enlargement of the head (macrocephaly); abnormally increased muscle stiffness and restriction of movement (spasticity); lack of coordination (ataxia); and vomiting and difficulty swallowing, coughing, breathing or talking (bulbar and pseudobulbar signs). Nearly 90% of infantile patients display developmental problems and seizures, and over 50% the other symptoms mentioned; however, no single symptom or combination of symptoms is always present.
Patients with type II Alexander disease rarely show delay or regression of development, macrocephaly or seizures, and mental decline may develop slowly or not at all. Instead, about 50% display bulbar/pseudobulbar signs, about 75% have ataxia and about 33% spasticity. Because these symptoms are not specific, adult Alexander disease is sometimes confused with more common disorders such as multiple sclerosis or the presence of tumors. (For information on these diseases, see the related disorders section of this report.)
The two different forms of Alexander disease are generalizations rather than defined entities. In actuality there is an overlapping continuum of presentations; a one year old could present with symptoms more typical of a 10 years old, and vice-versa. However, in all cases the symptoms almost always worsen with time and eventually lead to death, with the downhill course generally (but not always) being swifter the earlier the onset.

