Alpha Thalassemia X-linked Intellectual Disability Syndrome

synonyms:
ATR-X syndromeCarpenter-Waziri syndromecerebrofaciogenital syndromeChudley-Lowry syndromeHolmes-Gang syndromeXLID-hypotonic face syndromeX-linked intellectual disability - arch fingerprints- hypotonia syndrome

overview:
SummaryAlpha thalassemia X-linked intellectual disability (ATR-X) syndrome is a rare genetic disorder affecting multiple organ systems of the body. ATR-X syndrome is characterized by intellectual disability, characteristic facial features, abnormalities of the genitourinary tract and alpha thalassemia. Alpha thalassemia, a condition where there is a defect in the production of the oxygen-carrying pigments of red blood cells (hemoglobin), is not seen in every patient. Additional abnormalities are usually present in most cases. ATR-X syndrome is inherited as an X-linked recessive genetic condition.
IntroductionSome researchers have suggested the name XLID-hypotonic face syndrome be used to designate several disorders formerly considered separate entities including ATR-X syndrome, Carpenter-Waziri syndrome, Chudley-Lowry syndrome, Holmes-Gang syndrome and X-linked intellectual disability-arch fingerprints-hypotonia syndrome. All of these syndromes occur due to changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) of the same gene on the X chromosome. The name ATR-X syndrome is the most widely recognized term for this disorder.

symptoms:
The specific signs and symptoms present and their severity vary greatly from person to person. Many of the signs associated with ATR-X syndrome are apparent during infancy. Affected infants may exhibit diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), feeding difficulties and significant delays in reaching developmental milestones especially speaking or walking. Some affected individuals do not walk independently or fail to develop the ability to speak outside of a limited vocabulary. Intellectual disability is the most important of the clinical findings, but genital abnormalities, seizures and stiff movements of the legs also occur. Growth deficiency occurs after birth (postnatally) but may not become apparent until adolescence. Ultimately, growth deficiency may result in short stature.
Individuals with ATR-X syndrome have characteristic facial features including an abnormally large space between the eyes (hypertelorism), vertical skin folds (epicanthal folds) that may cover the eyes’ inner corners, underdevelopment of the middle portion of the face (mid-face hypoplasia), an abnormally flat bridge of the nose and a small triangular nose. Most infants also have microcephaly, a finding that indicates that the head circumference is smaller than would be expected for an infant’s age and sex. Additional features include an abnormally large, protruding tongue, improper positioning of the teeth of the upper jaw in relation to those of the lower jaw (malocclusion), spacing of the teeth and abnormal configuration of the outer, visible portions of the ears (pinnae). Some affected males do not have the typical facial features, or the typical features become less apparent with age.
Many affected individuals have abnormalities of the genitourinary tract including failure of the testes to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism), unusual placement of the urinary opening (meatus) on the underside of the penis (hypospadias) and underdevelopment of the scrotum. Rarely, the development of the external genitals will be intermediate between male and female (ambiguous genitalia).
In some patients, anomalies of the skeletal system may be present including shortening of the fingers and toes (brachydactyly), permanent fixation of certain fingers in a bent position (clinodactyly), joint contractures and abnormal side-to-side and front-to-back curvature of the spine (kyphoscoliosis).Some affected individuals may have alpha thalassemia, a condition where there is a defect in the production of the oxygen-carrying pigments of red blood cells (hemoglobin). The form of alpha-thalassemia associated with ATR-X syndrome is called hemoglobin H (HbH) disease, which may result in low levels of circulating red blood cells (anemia). This is usually not symptomatic or clinically significant.

