Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency

synonyms:
A1ADAATDgenetic emphysema

overview:
Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (A1AD) is a hereditary disorder characterized by low levels of a protein called alpha-1 antitrypsin (A1AT) which is found in the blood. This deficiency may predispose an individual to several illnesses and most commonly manifests as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (including bronchiectasis) and liver disease (especially cirrhosis and hepatoma), or more rarely, as a skin condition called panniculitis.
A1AD is also more frequent among individuals with what was previously called Wegener’s granulomatosis, now called polyangiitis with granulomatosis (GPA). A deficiency of A1AT allows substances that break down proteins (so-called proteolytic enzymes) to attack various tissues of the body. The attack results in destructive changes in the lungs (emphysema) and the skin and A1AD can also cause liver scarring because the A1AT protein can accumulate inside the liver cell. Alpha-1 antitrypsin is ordinarily released by specialized granules within a type of white blood cells called neutrophils (or polymorphonuclear leukocytes) in response to infection or inflammation.
Deficiency of alpha-1 antitrypsin results in unbalanced (i.e., relatively unopposed) rapid breakdown of proteins (protease activity), especially in the supporting elastic structures of the lungs which are found in the walls of the air sacs of the lung, also called alveoli. Over years, this destruction can lead to progressive breakdown of the walls of the air sacs which is emphysema and is accelerated by smoking, some occupational exposures and likely by other genetic modifiers of this risk which remain incompletely understood.

symptoms:
Lung diseaseAlpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency-associated lung disease is characterized by progressive degenerative and destructive changes in the lungs (emphysema, commonly of the so-called panacinar type). Emphysema is a chronic, usually slowly progressive illness, which most commonly causes shortness of breath. Other symptoms may include chronic cough, phlegm production and wheezing. Frequent respiratory infections may also occur. Serious changes that occur in the lungs and other organs of the body may develop by the time the person reaches the age of 40 – 50 years (but may also occur only later in life). Some individuals with severe deficiency of A1AT never develop emphysema and have a normal life, especially if they never smoke. Individuals affected by A1AD often experience long diagnostic delays (i.e., long intervals before their first symptom of A1AD and their first being diagnosed with A1AD) and have many visits to different health care providers before the diagnosis is made for the first time.
Breathing tests (pulmonary function tests) may show reduced expiratory air flow, hyperinflation and low diffusing capacity; a  CT scan of the chest may show loss of lung tissue that may not be apparent on a regular chest X-ray or on breathing test results. An abnormal level of oxygen in the arterial blood (arterial hypoxemia), with or without an elevated level of carbon dioxide in the blood, may also occur, especially if the lung disease is advanced.
Most commonly, changes are evident in the lower lung zones of plain chest X-rays or CT scans (about 2/3 of patients), though more classic changes of emphysema that affect predominantly the upper lung zones also occur in a minority of individuals.
Liver diseaseLiver disease caused by A1AD may occur during infancy, childhood, adolescence, or only newly during adulthood. Symptoms in infancy include prolonged yellow appearance of the skin (jaundice), mildly elevated liver test values and symptoms of cholestasis (e.g., jaundice, dark urine, pale stools and itching). Other symptoms may include enlarged liver, stomach bleeding, an abnormal accumulation of fluids within the abdominal cavity (ascites), feeding difficulties and poor growth or failure to thrive. Children and adolescents with this disorder may have symptoms of mildly elevated liver blood tests, severe liver dysfunction and a condition called portal hypertension which can result in bleeding from enlarged veins in the stomach or food tube (esophagus). Individuals with liver disease from A1AD may also become easily fatigued, experience decreased appetite, swelling of the legs or abdomen, enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly), accumulation of fluid in the abdomen and legs and a general increase in bleeding risk.
Laboratory tests of liver function may have abnormal results and the assessment of patients for and with liver disease increasingly depend on imaging studies (i.e., liver ultrasound, elastography, magnetic resonance imaging [MRI], etc.).
Later in the course of the cirrhosis, drowsiness may occur because the liver is unable to properly dispose of the waste products of protein metabolism (urea). A late symptom of this disorder may include an increased susceptibility to infection.
Chronic degenerative changes in the liver (scarring or cirrhosis) eventually develop in up to 30-40% of individuals with severe deficiency of A1AT, especially in non-smoking individuals who may escape the associated emphysema. Because the mechanism of the liver disease (i.e., accumulation of too much unsecreted A1AT protein within the liver cells) differs from that of the emphysema (i.e., proteolytic damage to the lung support tissues because there is too little A1AT in the lung), liver disease may occur separately from the emphysema (though both may co-occur in some individuals).
PanniculitisSome patients with A1AD develop a rare form of skin disease called panniculitis. Panniculitis appears to affect males and females equally, occurs at any age, and may occur in individuals with various A1AT types (called genotypes), not limited to those genotypes associated with severe deficiency of A1AT.
Panniculitis seems to develop in only a small fraction of patients with A1AD. The cause of panniculitis and why it occurs so uncommonly is unknown, though the observed favorable effects of increasing serum levels of A1AD with infused, purified A1AD protein (so-called “augmentation therapy”) suggests that panniculitis may be caused by unopposed proteolytic activity in the skin.
The skin lesions of panniculitis associated with A1AD begin as nodules that are tender, red and inflamed (erythematous), hardened (indurated) and occur beneath the skin (subcutaneous), often with an irregular border. Panniculitis often widely affects the torso or extremities and is characterized by ulceration in addition to serosanguineous (serum and blood) drainage and accompanying systemic symptoms, including fever. Severe tissue damage can accompany panniculitis. In some patients, direct trauma often precedes the development of the lesions.

