Alpha Thalassemia

overview:
Summary
Alpha thalassemia is a general term for a group of inherited blood disorders characterized by reduced or absent production of alpha-globin subunits, resulting in low levels of hemoglobin that is otherwise fully functional. Hemoglobin is found in red blood cells; it is the red, iron-rich, oxygen-carrying pigment of the blood. A main function of red blood cells is to deliver oxygen throughout the body. There are two main forms of alpha thalassemia that are associated with significant health problems – hemoglobin (Hb) Bart’s hydrops fetalis and hemoglobin H (HbH) disease. Hb Bart’s hydrops fetalis is a severe syndrome that is usually fatal to the developing embryo during gestation or shortly after birth; however, recent advances have led to improved treatments for this condition. HbH disease is highly variable, and the specific symptoms and severity can vary greatly from one person to another. Some individuals will have only minor symptoms, while others will develop potentially serious complications. The characteristic finding of all forms of alpha thalassemia is anemia, with red blood cells that are small (microcytic), contain low levels of functional hemoglobin (hypochromic), and may break down in prematurely in both the bone marrow (ineffective erythropoiesis) and in the peripheral circulation (hemolysis).  Consequently, severely affected individuals may not circulate sufficient oxygen-rich blood throughout the body. These individuals may experience fatigue, weakness, shortness of breath, dizziness or headaches. Severe anemia can cause serious, even life-threatening, complications if left untreated. Individuals with severe forms of HbH disease are usually treated with regular blood transfusions, which can result in the accumulation of excess iron in the body (iron overload). Although iron overload can damage numerous organs in the body, it can be effectively treated using several highly effective medications.
Alpha thalassemia is caused by mutations in two different genes, theHBA1and theHBA2genes. Most individuals inherit two copies of each gene (for a total of four genes); one of each from a person’s father, and one of each gene from a person’s mother. A mutation in any one of the four alpha genes results in a condition that has no symptoms (alpha thalassemia silent carrier), but individuals can pass the mutant gene on to their children. A mutation (or mutations) that affects two of the four alpha genes results in a condition that is asymptomatic or only very mild symptoms (alpha thalassemia minor). A mutation (or mutations) that affect three genes results in HbH disease, while defects that affect all four genes result in Hb Bart’s hydrops fetalis.
Introduction
Thalassemia is a general term for a group of congenital, genetic disorders characterized by low levels of hemoglobin, decreased red blood cell production, and anemia. There are two main forms – alpha thalassemia and beta thalassemia – each with various subtypes. Alpha thalassemia is caused by reduced or absent production of alpha-globin subunits, while beta thalassemia is caused by reduced or absent production of beta-globin subunits. Alpha thalassemia minor and beta thalassemia minor, also known as alpha thalassemia trait or beta thalassemia trait, are common conditions in many demographics. Beta thalassemia major was first described in the medical literature in 1925 by an American physician named Thomas Cooley. Beta thalassemia major is also known as Cooley’s anemia. These disorders are related, but distinct entities. The similar terminology and symptomology can cause confusion for affected individuals, their families, and physicians who are unfamiliar with these disorders or are not specialists in diagnosing and treating disorders of the blood and blood-forming organs (hematologists). NORD has a separate report on beta thalassemia.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms and severities of the alpha thalassemia conditions vary greatly from one person to another. Individuals with alpha thalassemia silent carrier do not develop symptoms, while individuals with alpha thalassemia minor do not develop any symptoms or are only mildly anemic. Many individuals with either form of alpha thalassemia go through life never knowing they carry an altered gene(s) for the disorder. In some cases, a diagnosis is made incidentally while they are being evaluated for another condition.
Two forms of alpha thalassemia are associated with significant symptoms, hemoglobin H disease and Hb Bart’s hydrops fetalis.
HEMOGLOBIN H (HbH) DISEASEThe specific symptoms and severity of HbH disease can vary greatly from one person to another. Some individuals do not develop symptoms and only become aware of the disorder upon routine blood testing. In some cases, affected individuals do not develop symptoms until adulthood. Most individuals exhibit symptoms associated with minor to moderate anemia. However, some individuals will develop severe symptoms that can develop during childhood or even the first year of life. It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals or parents of affected children should talk to their physicians and medical teams about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
Disease severity is influenced, in part, by the specific type of mutations present. HbH disease may be caused by deletional or nondeletional mutations, either alone or in combination. Deletional HbH disease occurs when a combination of deletion mutations remove three of the four genes that express the alpha-globin protein. This is the most common form of HbH disease. Nondeletional HbH disease occurs when a deletion mutation removes two alpha genes, and a nondeletional point mutation inactivates the third gene without physically removing it. Nondeletional mutations are generally associated with more severe anemia, are more likely to cause an enlargement of spleen and liver, and are more likely to require therapeutic blood transfusions.
HbH disease usually presents with anemia, which can be of varying degrees and severity. Anemia can be associated with fatigue, weakness, shortness of breath, lightheadedness, headaches, and yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes and whites of the eyes (jaundice). Severely affected infants often fail to grow and gain weight as expected based upon age and gender (failure to thrive). Some infants become progressively pale (pallor). Feeding problems, irritability or fussiness, abnormal enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly), and the abnormal enlargement of the spleen (splenomegaly) may also occur. Growth deficiency can occur in some cases.
Splenomegaly may cause enlargement or swelling of the abdomen. Splenomegaly may be associated with an overactive spleen (hypersplenism), a condition that can develops because too many blood cells build up and are destroyed within the spleen. Hypersplenism can contribute to anemia in individuals with alpha thalassemia and cause low levels of white blood cells, increasing the risk of infection, and low levels of platelets, which can predispose to bleeding.
Additional symptoms that may occur include masses that form because of blood cell production outside of the bone marrow (extramedullary hematopoiesis). These masses primarily form in the spleen, liver, chest, and spine. These masses can potentially cause compression of nearby structures and a variety of symptoms. Affected individuals may also exhibit leg ulcers, gallstones (cholelithiasis), and folic acid deficiency. Additionally, HbH disease tends to worsen when individuals take oxidant drugs, are exposed to certain chemicals, or have an infection because of the increased pace of destruction of red blood cells (hemolysis).
Some older adults with HbH disease, as well as individuals treated by regular blood transfusions, may develop iron overload, a condition characterized by the buildup of iron in various tissues of the body. Iron overload can cause tissue damage and impaired function of affected organs such as the heart, liver and endocrine glands. Iron overload can damage the heart and cause abnormal heart rhythms, inflammation of the membrane (pericardium) that lines the heart (pericarditis), and enlargement of the heart and disease of the heart muscle (dilated cardiomyopathy). Heart involvement can eventually progress to life-threatening complications such as heart failure. Involvement of the liver can cause scarring and inflammation of the liver (cirrhosis) and high blood pressure of the main vein of the liver (portal hypertension). Involvement of the endocrine glands can cause insufficiency of certain glands such as the thyroid (hypothyroidism) and pancreas (diabetes mellitus). Iron overload is a complication of repeated blood transfusions that may be used to treat some individuals with HbH disease. However, many adults who have never received a blood transfusion have developed iron overload, most likely due to increased absorption of iron from the gastrointestinal tract.
Hemoglobin H-Constant Spring is a variant of HbH disease and the most common nondeletional form of the disorder. Individuals with hemoglobin H-Constant Spring tend to have more severe anemia because red blood cell production is even less efficient than in nondeletional forms of HbH disease (ineffective erythropoiesis). Moderately severe splenomegaly is common in these individuals. Additional common symptoms include leg ulcers, gallstones, jaundice, and an increased risk for infection. Growth delays are more significant in affected children than in children with HbH disease. Affected individuals may be at particular risk of sudden, severe anemia that develops following an acute febrile illness, which is a nonspecific term for any illness, although it is usually one of rapid onset, accompanied by a fever.
HEMOGLOBIN (Hb) BART’S HYDROPS FETALISHb Bart’s hydrops fetalis, also known as alpha thalassemia major, is the most severe form of alpha thalassemia. The term hydrops fetalis describes the accumulation of large amounts of fluid (edema) in the tissues and organs of a developing fetus. Edema is widespread (diffuse). A developing fetus may also exhibit profound anemia, an abnormally enlarged liver (hepatomegaly), an abnormally enlarged spleen (splenomegaly), impaired brain development, and signs of heart failure. Abnormal accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid within the skull (hydrocephaly) may also occur. Hydrocephaly causes increased pressure on, and swelling of, the brain. A newborn infant may be pale and exhibit abnormalities of the skeleton and urinary (urogenital) tract. Hb Bart’s hydrops fetalis is usually fatal before birth (stillbirth) or shortly after birth (neonatal period).

