Alport Syndrome

synonyms:
hematuria-nephropathy deafness (former)hemorrhagic familial nephritis (former)hereditary deafness and nephropathy (former)hereditary nephritis (former)hereditary nephritis with sensory deafness (former)

overview:
Summary
Alport syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by progressive kidney disease and abnormalities of the inner ear and the eye. There are three genetic types. X-linked Alport syndrome (XLAS) is the most common; in these families affected males typically have more severe disease than affected females. In autosomal recessive Alport syndrome (ARAS) the severity of disease in affected males and females is similar. There is also an autosomal dominant form (ADAS) that affects males and females with equal severity. The hallmark of the disease is the presence of blood in the urine (hematuria) early in life, with progressive decline in kidney function (kidney insufficiency) that ultimately results in kidney failure, especially in affected males. About 50% of untreated males with XLAS develop kidney failure by age 25, increasing to 90% by age 40 and nearly 100% by age 60. Females with XLAS usually do not develop kidney insufficiency until later in life. They may not develop kidney insufficiency or failure at all, but the risk increases as they grow older. Both males and females with ARAS develop kidney failure, often in the teen-age years or early adulthood. ADAS tends to be a slowly progressive disorder in which renal insufficiency does not develop until well into adulthood. Individuals with Alport syndrome can also develop progressive hearing loss of varying severity and abnormalities of the eyes that usually do not result in impaired vision. XLAS is caused by variants in theCOL4A5gene. ARAS is caused by variants in both copies of either theCOL4A3or theCOL4A4gene. ADAS is caused by variants in one copy of theCOL4A3orCOL4A4gene. Alport syndrome is treated symptomatically, and certain medications can potentially delay the progression of kidney disease and the onset of kidney failure. Ultimately, in many patients, a kidney transplant is required.
Introduction
The disease we now know as Alport syndrome was first described in the British medical literature in the early years of the 20th century. In 1927 Dr. Cecil Alport published a paper describing the association of kidney disease and deafness in affected individuals. Many additional cases were described in the literature and the disorder was named after Dr. Alport in 1961. Alport syndrome is often discussed with a related disorder known as thin basement membrane nephropathy (TBMN), in which the predominant pathologic abnormality is thinning of glomerular basement membranes. Many people diagnosed with TBMN have variants in the same genes that cause Alport syndrome. People diagnosed with TBMN have persistent microscopic blood in the urine (hematuria) in a similar pattern as seen in individuals with Alport syndrome. Patients given a diagnosis of TBMN are less likely to have symptoms outside of the kidney (extrarenal abnormalities) than patients with Alport syndrome, and additional kidney findings such as protein in the urine (proteinuria), high blood pressure (hypertension), kidney insufficiency and kidney failure are less common than in Alport syndrome. Patients who have hematuria and variants in theCOL4A3,COL4A4orCOL4A5genes should be given a diagnosis of Alport syndrome, while those with thin glomerular basement membranes but no variants in these genes should be diagnosed with hematuria with thin glomerular basement membranes. Differentiating Alport syndrome and TBMN can be challenging, especially in young patients and in women. For more information on this topic see the Related Disorders section of this report.

symptoms:
The onset, symptoms, progression and severity of Alport syndrome can vary greatly from one person to another due, in part, to the specific subtype and gene variant present. Some individuals may have a mild, slowly progressive form of the disorder, while others have earlier onset of severe complications.
The first sign of kidney disease is blood in the urine (hematuria). Hematuria is usually not visible to the naked eye but can be seen when the urine is examined under a microscope. This is referred to as microscopic hematuria. Microscopic hematuria can also be detected by urinary dipstick testing. Sometimes, blood may be visible in the urine (i.e. the urine may be brown, pink, or red) for a few days, usually when an affected individual has a cold or the flu. This is referred to as an episode of gross hematuria. Males with XLAS usually exhibit persistent microscopic hematuria early in life. About 95% of females with XLAS syndrome have microscopic hematuria, but it may come and go (intermittent). Both males and females with ARAS develop hematuria during childhood. Males and females with ADAS also have hematuria.
With time many affected individuals exhibit elevated levels of albumin and other proteins in the urine (albuminuria and proteinuria), which are indications that kidney disease is progressing. The next stage in progression is gradual loss of kidney function, frequently associated with high blood pressure (hypertension), until, ultimately, the kidneys fail to work (end stage kidney disease or ESKD). The kidneys have several functions including filtering and excreting waste products from the blood and body, synthesizing certain hormones and helping maintain the balance of vital minerals in the body such as potassium, sodium, chloride and other electrolytes. A variety of symptoms can be associated with ESKD including weakness and fatigue, diminished appetite, poor digestion, swelling of feet, ankles and lower legs(edema), excessive thirst and frequent urination.
As noted above, the rate of progression of kidney disease varies greatly. Without treatment, many males with XLAS will develop ESKD by their teen-age years or early adulthood, although some will not develop kidney failure until their 40s, 50s or even 60s. Most females with XLAS do not develop kidney insufficiency until later in life. Kidney failure is less common than in males with XLAS but still a significant risk – about 15% by age 45 and 20-30% by age 60.  In untreated individuals with ARAS, ESKD typically develops by about age 30 or before.  ESKD is usually delayed until 50-70 years of age in people with ADAS, and many people with ADAS will not progress to ESKD.
Progressive hearing loss (sensorineural deafness) occurs frequently in people with Alport syndrome. Sensorineural deafness results from impaired transmission of sound input from the inner ears (cochleae) to the brain via the auditory nerves. The hearing loss is bilateral, meaning it affects both ears. Diminished hearing is usually evident by late childhood in males with XLAS although it may be mild or subtle. In males with XLAS the frequency of hearing loss is approximately 50% by age 15, 75% by age 20 and 90% by age 40. Hearing loss is progressive and may require hearing aids as early as the teen-age years. Hearing aids are typically very helpful in people with deafness caused by Alport syndrome.
The onset, progression and severity of hearing loss in Alport syndrome varies greatly due to, in part, the specific genetic variant present in each individual. Hearing loss in females with XLAS occurs less frequently than in males and usually occurs later in life, although a smaller percentage of females will develop hearing loss in their teen-age years. Both males and females with ARAS develop hearing loss, usually during late childhood or early adolescence. Individuals with ADAS may develop hearing loss, although this occurs much later during life, usually as older adults.
Individuals with Alport syndrome may also develop abnormalities in several parts of the eyes including the lens, retina and cornea. Eye abnormalities in XLAS and ARAS are very similar in presentation. Eye abnormalities are uncommon in ADAS.
Anterior lenticonus is a condition in which the lenses of the eyes are shaped abnormally, specifically the lens bulges forward into the space (anterior chamber) behind the cornea. Anterior lenticonus can result in the need for glasses and sometimes leads to cataract formation. Anterior lenticonus occurs in about 20% of males with XLAS and often becomes apparent by late adolescence or early adulthood.
The retina, which is the nerve-rich, light-sensitive membrane that lines the back of the eyes, may also be affected, usually by pigmentary consisting of yellow or white flecks superficially located on the retina. These changes do not appear to affect vision. Rare patients develop progressive thinning of the retina that can result in holes (macular holes) that can impair vision.
The cornea, which is the clear (transparent) outer layer of the eyes, may also be affected, although the specific abnormalities can vary. The effects on the cornea may be slowly progressive. Recurrent corneal erosions in which the outermost layer of the cornea (epithelium) does not stick (adhere) to the eye properly may occur. Recurrent corneal erosions can cause discomfort or severe eye pain, an abnormal sensitivity to light (photophobia), blurred vision and the sensation of a foreign body (such as dirt or an eyelash) in the eye. Posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy may also occur. Effects on the cornea may be slowly progressive. Both eyes may be affected; one eye can be more severely affected than the other. In severe cases, posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy can cause swelling (edema) of a specific layer of the cornea, photophobia, the sensation of a foreign body (such as dirt or an eyelash) in the eye and decreased vision.
Additional symptoms can occur in certain individuals with Alport syndrome. In a small number of males, aneurysms of the chest or abdominal portions of the aorta, the main artery that carries blood away from the heart, have occurred. Aneurysms occur when the walls of blood vessels balloon or bulge outward, potentially rupturing causing bleeding within the body.

