Alternating Hemiplegia of Childhood

synonyms:
AHCalternating hemiplegia syndrome

overview:
Alternating hemiplegia of childhood (AHC) is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by repeated episodes of weakness or paralysis that may affect one side of the body or the other (hemiplegia) or both sides of the body at once (quadriplegia). Additional episodic symptoms usually include intermittent abnormal eye movements, episodes of muscle stiffness or posturing (dystonia), and in a substantial percentage of cases, seizures. Delays in attaining developmental milestones (developmental delays), cognitive impairment, and persistent issues with balance and the presence of continuous dance-like movements of limbs or facial muscles (chorea) may occur independently of episodes of paralysis, weakness or stiffness and persist between episodes. The severity of AHC and the specific types of episodes that occur can vary dramatically from one individual to another. First symptoms usually begin before the age of 18 months. AHC is caused by mutations in theATP1A3gene in the majority of those affected. AHC is a rare disorder that was first reported in the medical literature in 1971 by doctors Simon Verret and John C. Steele. They described an unusual disorder in eight children who demonstrated intermittent episodes of weakness, affecting first one side of the body, then the other, with onset in early childhood, including one child who manifested symptoms as early as 3 months of age. However, the disorder remained poorly understood for many years, in part, because of its rarity and complex and highly variable symptoms. More research is necessary to improve early diagnosis, understand the full range of symptoms, and develop more effective treatments. The identification of a causative gene for AHC should lead to a better understanding of the disorder and open new avenues for treatment. The spectrum of related disorders with overlapping symptoms continues to expand, and has led to the increasingly common use of the term “ATP1A3-related neurologic disorders”. This umbrella includes patients with rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism (RDP), alternating hemiplegia of childhood (AHC), and cerebellar ataxia, areflexia, pes cavus, optic atrophy, and sensorineural hearing loss (CAPOS) syndrome. However, an increasing number of patients with overlapping symptoms that further expand the phenotypes even beyond these well-described disorders, initially thought to be completely distinct, continues to expand.

symptoms:
AHC is a highly variable and unpredictable disorder and the specific symptoms and severity of the disorder can vary greatly from one person to another. Some individuals may have mild forms of the disorder with a good prognosis, and develop almost normally. However, others may have a severe form with the potential for serious and disabling complications that can disrupt various aspects of life and manifest as persistent neurologic disability.
It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis. Symptoms usually develop before 18 months of age.
The most prominent symptom is repeated episodes of weakness or paralysis affecting one side of the body at a time in an alternating fashion (alternating hemiplegia or hemiparesis). Weakness or paralysis may also sometimes affect both sides of the body (quadriplegia) or rapidly transition from one side to the other. These episodes typically last for minutes to hours, but in some children under certain circumstances can persist for several days or even weeks in some cases. They may occur daily, weekly or once every few months. In some individuals one side of the body is affected more than the other. In episodes when both sides are involved, one side may recover more quickly than the other. The face may be spared during an episode, but weakness of facial muscles (facial paresis) can occur with mouth deviation, slurred speech, and difficulty swallowing. The intensity of individual episodes varies as well and can range from numbness to a complete loss of feeling and movement. Episodes often begin to appear in early infancy, and sometimes even in the first few days of life.
During an episode, affected individuals usually remain alert and may be able to communicate verbally. A unique aspect of these episodes is that they cease when sleeping and may not resume for approximately 15-20 minutes upon waking. In severe, prolonged cases, this window of time may allow affected individuals to eat and drink. Episodes can become worse over time and, in severe cases, can make walking unassisted difficult. Some affected individuals may feel tired or unwell shortly before a hemiplegic episode occurs.
Some individuals with AHC may also have additional neurologic symptoms that may occur isolated from or during hemiplegic episodes. These symptoms include sudden, dance-like, involuntary movements of the limbs and facial muscles (choreoathetosis), difficulty breathing (dyspnea), difficulty coordinating muscles (ataxia) causing walking and balance problems, and dystonia. Dystonia is a general term for a group of muscle disorders generally characterized by involuntary muscle contractions that force the body into abnormal, sometimes painful, movements and positions (postures). Dystonic attacks can involve the tongue potentially causing breathing and swallowing difficulties.
During these episodes, some affected individuals may experience dysfunction of the autonomic nervous system, which regulates certain involuntary body functions such as heart rate, blood pressure, sweating, and bowel and bladder control. Symptoms associated with autonomic dysfunction can vary greatly, but may include excessive or lack of sweating, changes in body temperature, skin discoloration, altered pain perception and gastrointestinal problems. Cardiorespiratory problems such as a slow heartbeat (bradycardia), a high-pitched wheezing (stridor), sudden constriction of the walls of the tiny airway branches called bronchioles (bronchospasm), and difficulty breathing or gasping for breath may also develop.
The characteristic episodes that define AHC are not epileptic in nature, although are frequently mistaken for epileptic seizures early in life. However, 50% or more of affected individuals develop epilepsy as they get older. Epileptic seizures typically occur much less frequently than hemiplegic episodes, but when they do, may result in status epilepticus, or persistent seizure activity requiring medical intervention. Epilepsy in children with AHC is often treated with standard antiepileptic medications, but may sometimes prove resistant to traditional epilepsy treatments (intractable epilepsy).
Some infants and children with AHC exhibit developmental delays. In addition, some children who experience prolonged, recurrent episodes may develop slowly progressive neurological problems including loss of previously acquired skills (psychomotor regression) and cognitive impairment. Behavioral or psychiatric issues such as impulsivity, short-temperedness, poor communication and poor concentration may also occur. Some affected children may have learning disabilities and issues with skills that require movement and coordination (dyspraxia).
A common, frequent type of spell in infants with AHC results in irregular eye movements including rapid, involuntary, “jerking” eye movements that may be side to side, up and down or rotary (episodic nystagmus). Nystagmus often affects only one eye (monocular). In some patients, these irregular eye movements are the first noticeable symptom of AHC, but they often go unrecognized, or are considered most likely to represent seizure activity. Some affected individuals may intermittently appear crossed-eyed, where the eyes are misaligned either outward (exotropia) or inward (esotropia). With exotropia, one eye drifts outward toward the ear, while the other eye faces straight ahead. With esotropia, one eye drifts inward toward the nose, while the other eye faces straight ahead.

