Alveolar Soft Part Sarcoma

synonyms:
Alveolar sarcoma of soft partsAlveolar soft-tissue sarcomaASPSASP sarcoma

overview:
Alveolar soft part sarcoma (ASPS) is a rare, slow growing soft tissue tumor of an unclear cause. It is among the least common sarcomas, representing 0.2-1 percent of large studies of soft tissue sarcomas. ASPS is characterized by a painless mass that most commonly arises in the leg or buttock, with a particular affinity to travel to the lungs as multiple nodules, presumably while the sarcoma itself is still small. This disorder is very rare because it involves a specific breaking and joining event between two chromosomes, called an “unbalanced translocation”. This finding is observed in essentially all people with ASPS examined so far. This finding cannot be passed on to children, however, as the finding occurs only in the tumor cells, not in the body cells. In addition, there are no families in which multiple family members have the disorder. ASPS tends to occur more often in younger individuals, specifically adolescents and young adults.
Treatment is with surgery for the primary place where the sarcoma arises. Radiation therapy is sometimes considered as an adjunct to surgery depending on the tumor characteristics (size, location, microscopic appearance). For disease that travels to the lungs, sometimes surgery is possible to remove nodules, but often systemic therapy is the only option for treatment. This tumor tends to be resistant to traditional chemotherapy; however newer approaches utilizing so called “targeted” chemotherapy drugs as well as “immunotherapy” are recently emerging as treatment strategies for patients that have advanced disease/higher stage.
ASPS is classified as a soft tissue sarcoma. Sarcomas are malignant tumors that arise from the connective tissue, which connects, supports, and surrounds various structures and organs in the body. Soft tissue includes fat, muscle, nerves, tendons and blood and lymph vessels.

symptoms:
The typical clinical findings are of a painless thigh or buttock mass, although ASPS can occur in the trunk, arm or elsewhere. Sometimes these masses cause pain by stretching of the surrounding tissues, and cause limping or other difficulty with movement. These masses are usually soft and slow growing. In children, these masses most often occur in the head and neck, most commonly the tongue and the eye socket (orbit). In adults, the thighs and buttocks are most often affected.
Although ASPS is a slow growing tumor, it can spread (metastasize) to other areas of the body. Sometimes there is a significant delay of years after resection of the original tumor before sites of spread (metastases) are detectable. The lungs, brain and bone are most frequently affected when the cancer spreads. In the advanced stages, when nodules are found in the lung, the tumor nodules can cause cough, sharp chest pain, or fluid collections around the lungs (pleural effusions). Some people will develop headaches associated with metastases to the brain, or a fracture from metastases to the bones. The involvement of the lungs or brain in ASPS are potentially life-threatening complications, but people can live for several years despite lung nodules, since the nodules grow only very slowly for most people. In people with brain metastases, surgery and radiation are the major ways to control the tumor and the side effects they cause in the brain.

