Alveolar Capillary Dysplasia with Misalignment of Pulmonary Veins

synonyms:
ACDMPValveolar capillary dysplasia

overview:
Summary
Alveolar capillary dysplasia with misalignment of the pulmonary veins (ACDMPV) is a rarely diagnosed lethal lung developmental disorder in newborns (neonates) that is present at birth (congenital). Infants experience severe, life-threatening breathing problems (respiratory distress) and high blood pressure in the arterial blood vessels of the lungs (pulmonary hypertension). These problems may occur within a few hours or a couple of days after birth. Almost all infants with this condition die within the first month of life. Very rarely, the disorder presents later (late-onset form). Infants often have additional symptoms involving the gastrointestinal tract, cardiovascular system or genitourinary system. In most affected children, AVDMPV is caused by point mutations (single nucleotide variants in DNA) involving theFOXF1gene or by a loss of genetic material (copy-number variant (CNV) deletions (or genomic deletion) that include theFOXF1gene or its distant regulatory genomic region (lung-specific enhancer). The disorder is usually not inherited but there are very rare instances where ACDMPV has been reported to run in families and can be inherited.

symptoms:
Within the first few days after birth, infants with ACDMPV develop severe breathing problems and lack of oxygen in the blood (hypoxemia). They experience shortness of breath and cyanosis, a condition marked by abnormal bluish discoloration of the skin that occurs because of low levels of oxygen in the blood. High blood pressure in the arterial blood vessels of the lungs (pulmonary hypertension) also occurs. Breathing issues become progressively worse and most infants experience respiratory failure. Very rarely, infants may not show signs of the disorder until weeks or even months after birth, usually when pulmonary hypertension of variable severity is noted.
Affected infants often have additional symptoms, including gastrointestinal symptoms such as twisting of the large intestines, genitourinary symptoms such as swelling of the kidneys because of urine backing up (hydronephrosis) or cardiovascular symptoms such as underdevelopment of the left side of the heart.

