Amelogenesis Imperfecta

synonyms:
AI

overview:
Amelogenesis imperfecta (AI) refers to a group of rare, inherited disorders characterized by abnormal enamel formation. The term is typically restricted to those disorders of enamel development not associated with other abnormalities of the body.
Clinical researchers usually classify AI into four main types of which 20 subtypes are recognized. The main types are based on clinical appearance, radiographic appearance and enamel thickness, and the subtypes are based on mode of inheritance and the causal gene. The main types are: hypoplastic (type I); hypomaturation (type II); hypocalcified (type III); and hypomaturation/hypoplasia/taurodontism (type IV). AI may be inherited as an X-linked, autosomal dominant, or autosomal recessive genetic trait, depending on the subtype.

symptoms:
AI is characterized by defective or missing tooth enamel.
Secondary effects of this disorder may be cracked tooth, early tooth decay and/or loss, in addition to susceptibility to multiple diseases of the tissues surrounding teeth (periodontal tissues) such as gums, cementum, ligaments, and alveolar bones in which the tooth root rests. Teeth are also sensitive to both hot or cold exposures, and sometimes both. This sensitivity can be due to the exposed sensitive dentin layer which is usually entirely protected by the enamel layer on top. The dental pulp in the root canal is where all of the tooth nerves are located, and the exposed sensitive dentin typically leads to continuous severe pain.
The psychological trauma of patients with AI cannot be overlooked. Patients with AI have unsightly teeth that are discolored or spaced. Moreover, some patients also suffer from what’s called an open bite (the upper and lower jaws do not align properly), which results in an unpleasant appearance of the teeth. With continuous restorative, orthodontic and periodontal restoration, however, the teeth can end up looking normal and remain functional throughout the life of the individual. These dental treatments are expensive and require huge dedication. Patients who cannot afford these treatments sometimes have their teeth pulled, which adds more to their psychological trauma.
Type I hypoplastic AI is characterized by small to normal tops (crowns) of the teeth, upper and lower teeth that do not meet showing a poor bite, and teeth that vary in color from off-white to yellow-brown. The enamel thickness varies from thin and smooth to normal, with grooves, lines and/or pits.
Type II hypomaturation AI is commonly associated with an open bite and creamy white to yellow-brown roughly surfaced teeth that may be tender and sore. The enamel is generally normal in thickness but tends to be chipped away or scraped.
Type III hypocalcified AI is seen in patients with an open bite and creamy white to yellow-brown rough enamel-surfaced teeth that may be tender and sore. These teeth usually carry substantial precipitates of stony material from the fluids of the mouth (calculi). The enamel is generally normal in thickness but tends to be chipped away or scraped.
Type IV hypomaturation/hypoplasia/taurodontism AI usually is characterized by smaller than normal teeth, the color of which may range from white to yellow-brown, and teeth that appear to be mottled or spotted. The enamel is thinner than normal with areas that are clearly less dense (hypomineralized) and pitted.

