Ameloblastic Carcinoma

synonyms:
No synonyms found

overview:
Ameloblastic carcinoma is a rare malignant (cancerous) tumor that normally begins in the bones of the jaw. It is classified as an odontogenic tumor, meaning that it arises from the epithelium that forms the enamel of the teeth. The pattern of epithelial growth is similar to the developing tooth germ and distinctive enough to separate it from other epithelial malignances. Symptoms may include progressive pain and swelling of the jaw. Ameloblastic carcinoma may spread (metastasize) to affect other organs of the body.
Carcinoma refers to a malignancy that arises from epithelium. For instance carcinoma of the skin is termed ‘squamous cell carcinoma’ and carcinoma from glandular epithelium is termed ‘adenocarcinoma’.  The term “cancer” refers to a group of diseases characterized by abnormal, uncontrolled cellular growth that invades surrounding tissues and may spread (metastasize) to distant bodily tissues or organs via the bloodstream, the lymphatic system, or other means. Different forms of cancer, including odontogenic tumors, are classified based upon the cell type involved, the specific nature of the malignancy, and the disease’s clinical course.

symptoms:
Some individuals with ameloblastic carcinoma may not experience any symptoms (asymptomatic). Symptoms that may occur include progressive pain and swelling of the jaw. Bleeding and headaches may also occur. Rare findings include the inability to open the mouth (trismus) or dysphonia, a voice disorder characterized by hoarseness, weakness, tingling or numbness (paresthesia), and, in rare cases, voice loss (my note: disruption of the voice because of laryngeal involvement (vocal cords) would be quite unusual but dysphagia, trouble eating, can be a problem if the tumor is large enough to cause obstruction or malocclusion). Nasal discharge and blockage of the nasal passages may occur if the tumor involves the sinuses of the maxilla. The size of the tumor may result in dental abnormalities such as causing the upper and lower teeth to fail to meet properly (malocclusion).
The lower jaw (mandible) is the most common site for the development of ameloblastic carcinoma. Less frequently, the upper jaw (maxilla) is the primary tumor site. In one reported case, the primary site was the anterior skull base.
Ameloblastic carcinomas are often aggressive and may spread (metastasize) to other areas of the body especially the lungs, potentially causing life-threatening complications. The bone, liver and brain are also common sites for metastasis. The most common course of the disease is persistent recurrence with local spread.

