Amniotic Band Syndrome

synonyms:
ABSamnion rupture sequenceamniotic bandsamniotic band sequenceamniotic deformity, adhesions, mutilations (ADAM) complexcongenital constriction ringsconstriction band syndromelimb body wall complexStreeter anomalyStreeter bandsStreeter dysplasia

overview:
Amniotic band syndrome is a well-known condition associated with a variety of birth defects. The abnormalities occur in the early weeks of pregnancy after the affected parts of the body have formed normally. The severity of amniotic band syndrome can range from a single, isolated finding to multiple, disfiguring complications. The arms and legs are most often affected. The head and face and, in some patients, various internal organs can also be affected. The exact cause of amniotic band syndrome is unknown and is controversial.

symptoms:
Several different patterns of birth defects have been identified with amniotic band syndrome. The three most common patterns are amniotic band syndrome characterized by one or more limbs being affected; the limb-body-wall complex; and amniotic band syndrome characterized by abnormalities of the head and face (craniofacial abnormalities), defects of the brain and serious malformation of the arms and legs.
Most infants with amniotic band syndrome have some form of deformity of the fingers and toes. Upper limbs are affected more often than lower limbs. In some patients, one limb or one hand or foot may be the only symptom of the disorder. The specific physical features can include abnormally short fingers or toes and absence of the end (distal portion), webbing (fusion) of fingers or toes (syndactyly), constriction rings and extra strands of tissue adhering to the fingers. The constriction rings that encircle a limb or digit can alter blood flow.
Another pattern associated with amniotic band syndrome is referred to as the limb-body wall complex, a lethal condition.  Affected infants have protrusion of the soft internal organs of the body (viscera) the abdominal or chest cavities through a fissure in the abdominal wall (abdominoschisis) or the chest wall (thoracoschisis), and a variety of defects affecting the arms and legs.
A third patterns associated with amniotic band syndrome involves craniofacial abnormalities such as incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate), facial clefts, small, underdeveloped eyes (microphthalmia), narrowing of the nasal passages (choanal atresia) and malformations affecting the size and shape of the skull.  In some infants, the head is attached to the placenta.

