Amniotic Fluid Embolism

synonyms:
anaphylactoid syndrome of pregnancyAFE

overview:
Amniotic fluid embolism (AFE) is an extremely rare, but life-threatening complication that affects pregnant women shortly before, during, or immediately following labor and childbirth. Most instances occur during labor. In this disorder, it is hypothesized that a pregnant woman has a severe, allergic reaction to amniotic fluid or other fetal material such as fetal cells, which enter the mother’s bloodstream. Amniotic fluid is contained within the amniotic sac. This fluid supports, cushions, and protects a developing fetus. Amniotic fluid embolism is unpredictable and no risk factors have been identified.  AFE can cause a severe, rapid decline in the mother’s health. For years, some researchers believed that the amniotic fluid and fetal cells cause obstruction within the mother’s blood vessels, but now most researchers believe that the mother’s immune system reacts to the amniotic fluid and fetal cells causing an overwhelming immune system response, which ends up harming the mother and the fetus. Breathing problems, cardiac arrest, and excessive bleeding are some of the life-threatening complications that can occur. Researchers and physicians do not fully understand why amniotic fluid or fetal cells entering the mother’s bloodstream causes this reaction in some women. Amniotic fluid embolism is a medical emergency that develops suddenly and rapidly and can be fatal. Early recognition and prompt supportive treatment are essential.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of amniotic fluid embolism often develop rapidly. Nonspecific symptoms including headaches, chest pain, cough, sweating, nausea, and vomiting have been reported as early signs. Other common initial symptoms include difficulty breathing or shortness of breath (dyspnea), abnormally rapid breathing (tachypnea), low blood pressure (hypotension), an abnormally rapid heartbeat (tachycardia), bluish discoloration of the skin and mucous membranes due to a lack of oxygen (cyanosis) in the blood, and a deficiency in the amount of oxygen reaching the tissues of the body (hypoxia). There may be rapidly high blood pressure in the blood vessels of the lungs (pulmonary hypertension) and sudden narrowing of blood vessels (vasospasm).
Breathing problems can progress to acute respiratory failure a severe, life-threatening complication where damage and fluid leakage into the lungs makes breathing difficult or impossible. Some affected women experience increasing cardiac rhythm abnormalities, low blood pressure, shock, and/or the abrupt loss of heat function despite no underlying heart disease (cardiac arrest). Cardiac arrest can cause gasping breath, no breathing, or complete unresponsiveness in the affected individual. Affected women may experience an altered mental status including anxiety or confusion, seizures, or coma.
Most women develop a condition called disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). In DIC, blood clotting factors, specialized proteins that help the blood to clot, are used up or broken down. Without these clotting factors, an affected woman cannot create blood clots to stop bleeding. There may be bleeding from the uterus and from puncture sites, such as the site of an intravenous needle or an epidural catheter. In rare instances, severe bleeding (hemorrhaging) may be the first sign of amniotic fluid embolism.
Doctors may note a condition called nonreassuring fetal status. This term means that the fetus is not doing as well as would normally be expected. The fetus may not be getting enough oxygen and there may be an abnormally slow heart rate. Nonreassuring fetal status is an assessment of fetal health given late in the pregnancy or during delivery. In the event that an AFE occurs during pregnancy, the infant must be expeditiously delivered as a life saving measure for both the mother and fetus.

