Amyloidosis

overview:
General Discussion
Amyloidosis is a systemic disorder that is classified into several types based on the precursor protein. The different types of amyloidosis are classified as systemic or localized. AL (immunoglobulin light chain, historically known as primary) amyloidosis is the most common type of systemic amyloidosis. AL amyloidosis results from an abnormality (dyscrasia) of a type of white blood cell called plasma cells in the bone marrow and is closely related to multiple myeloma. AA (historically known at secondary) amyloidosis is derived from the inflammatory protein serum amyloid A. AA amyloidosis occurs in association with chronic inflammatory diseases such as the rheumatic diseases, familial Mediterranean fever, chronic inflammatory bowel disease, tuberculosis or empyema. Hereditary amyloidosis is a rare type of amyloidosis that is caused by an abnormal gene. There are several abnormal genes that can cause hereditary amyloidosis, but the most common type of hereditary amyloidosis is called ATTR and caused by changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in the transthyretin (TTR) gene. Age related amyloidosis, in which the amyloid is derived from wild-type (normal) transthyretin, is a slowly progressive disease that affects the hearts of elderly individuals, usually men and less commonly women, and is called ATTRwt amyloidosis. Amyloid deposits may occasionally occur in isolation without evidence of a systemic disease; isolated bladder or tracheal amyloidosis are the most common such presentations. Dialysis-related beta2-microglobulin amyloidosis is a type of systemic amyloidosis that can occur in individuals who have experienced long-term kidney dialysis to remove accumulated impurities or wastes in the blood by mechanical filtration. This form of amyloidosis, also known as AB2MG (amyloid associated with the beta-2m protein), is associated with the aggregation of beta2-microglobulin, a type of amyloid protein that is cleared by the normally functioning kidney. Dialysis-related beta2-microglobulin amyloidosis occurs in patients with near end-stage renal disease. It does not affect individuals with normal or mildly reduced renal function or patients with a functioning renal transplant.

symptoms:
Amyloidosis is usually a multisystem disease resulting in a wide spectrum of clinical presentations. Consequently, a patient may present to, or be referred to, one of several subspecialists, most commonly a nephrologist, cardiologist or neurologist. Recent advances in therapy have rendered early and precise diagnosis critical if the patient is to fully benefit. Most patients have more than one organ involved and therefore the finding of a combination of any of the features below should heighten the suspicion of amyloidosis:
The kidney is the organ most commonly involved in AL amyloidosis and AA amyloidosis, however, rarely involved in hereditary (familial) amyloidosis. An excessive amount of protein in the urine (proteinuria) is the usual manifestation of renal involvement and is commonly heavy, resulting in the nephrotic syndrome. Less commonly, amyloid causes an excess of urea and other nitrogenous wastes in the blood (progressive azotemia) as the initial manifestation of renal disease. An abnormal accumulation of fluid such as swelling of the legs and abdomen, in the absence of heart failure is a feature of nephrotic syndrome, as is the presence of excess cholesterol in the blood (hypercholesterolemia) that may be profound. The kidneys often become small, pale and hard, but in amyloidosis, large kidneys are commonly seen as well.
Amyloidosis frequently involves the heart. The heart is commonly involved in AL and ATTRv amyloidosis and is the most common phenotype of ATTRwt amyloidosis. Amyloid infiltration of the heart results in ventricular wall thickening and the development of heart failure. Rapidly progressive congestive heart failure with thick ventricular walls is the classical presentation of AL cardiac amyloidosis. The heart is invariably involved in ATTRwt amyloidosis, often in ATTR amyloidosis and rarely in AA amyloidosis. Common symptoms of heart involvement include: an enlarged heart (cardiomegaly); an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmias); and abnormalities of the heart seen on electrocardiograms (for example: low voltage). Congestive heart failure is the most common cardiac complication of amyloidosis. Nodular deposits of amyloid may be present on the membranous sac that surrounds the heart (pericardium) and on the lining of the heart chambers or heart valves (endocardium).
Although less common than renal or cardiac involvement, neuropathy may be a significant problem in amyloidosis. Occasionally, it is the presenting and predominant feature of AL amyloidosis. In specific variants of hereditary amyloidosis (particularly V30M ATTR originally known as familial amyloid polyneuropathy), it is the primary feature of the disease. The neuropathy is often painful and sensorimotor in nature although neuropathic pain may be occasionally significant. These symptoms may include sensory neuropathy with numbness and tingling sensations in the feet that progresses to the legs and eventually the upper extremities; motor neuropathy with loss of motion beginning in the feet and extending upward. Carpal tunnel syndrome is commonly seen, not due to direct nerve involvement, but rather to soft tissue infiltration causing median nerve compression. In ATTRv amyloidosis, the peripheral neuropathy is frequently accompanied by an autonomic neuropathy characterized by constipation and a decrease in the amount of sweat production (hypohidrosis), a sudden drop in blood pressure when the patient stands up (postural hypotension) and, in the male, erectile dysfunction. Postural hypotension may be profound and result in recurrent fainting (syncopal) episodes. Systemic amyloidosis does not involve the central nervous system and is unrelated to Alzheimer disease.
Amyloidosis may affect the liver and the spleen. Amyloid involvement in the spleen increases the risk of spontaneous rupture of that organ. Some degree of hepatic involvement is common in AL amyloidosis. It is also common in AA amyloidosis but is not seen in ATTRv amyloidosis. In most patients, hepatic involvement is asymptomatic. An enlarged liver (hepatomegaly) and an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly) are the most notable signs. Generally, the amyloid-infiltrated liver feels very hard, and elevated liver enzymes (particularly alkaline phosphatase) and other liver function abnormalities may be detected early. Generally, the function of the liver is not significantly affected until late in the course of the disease. Elevation of bilirubin is an ominous sign and may portend hepatic failure. Hepatic amyloidosis rarely occurs in isolation and is usually associated with organ involvement elsewhere.
Amyloidosis may also affect the gastrointestinal (digestive) system. Amyloid accumulation in the gastrointestinal tract may cause a lack of movement (motility) in the esophagus and the small and large intestines. Malabsorption, ulceration, bleeding, weak gastric activity, pseudo-obstruction of the gastrointestinal tract, protein loss and diarrhea may also occur. Loss of taste, and a difficulty eating solid foods because of enlargement of the tongue (macroglossia) from amyloid infiltration, may contribute to weight loss, or weight loss may be a non-specific manifestation of the systemic disease. In patients with autonomic neuropathy, gastric emptying is impaired, resulting in a sensation of early satiety.
The skin is frequently involved in primary amyloidosis. Dermatologic involvement is almost exclusively limited to AL amyloidosis and consists of soft tissue, skin and vascular abnormalities. Periorbital purpura is a result of capillary fragility and may appear after coughing, sneezing, or straining for a bowel movement. Not infrequently, purpuric lesions may arise after such simple actions as rubbing the eyelids. Soft tissue infiltration may cause macroglossia and hoarseness, although examination of the vocal cords may appear normal. Lesions of the skin may be visible or may be so small that they may be seen only with a microscope. Waxy looking papular lesions may appear on the face and the neck. They may also occur under the arms (axillary region), near the anus and the groin. Other areas that may be affected are the mucous areas such as the ear canal or tongue. Areas of swelling, hemorrhages under the skin (purpura), hair loss (alopecia), inflammation of the tongue (glossitis) and a dry mouth (xerostomia) may also be present.
Problems with the respiratory system that are associated with amyloidosis often parallel cardiac symptoms. In the localized form of amyloidosis, air passages and ducts may be obstructed by amyloid deposits in the nasal sinuses, voice box (larynx) and throat (trachea) and bronchial tree. Fluid collecting in the pleural space (pleural effusion) is quite common in patients with congestive heart failure due to amyloidosis, but large recurrent pleural effusions disproportionate to the degree of heart failure suggest pleural amyloidosis.
Joint abnormalities (arthropathy) occur in amyloidosis due to the accumulation of amyloid deposits in the lining of joints (synovial membranes). This occurs in AL amyloidosis and occasionally in dialysis-related amyloidosis. Articular cartilage or the synovial membrane and fluid may become involved as well. Symptoms are similar to those of rheumatoid arthritis. Amyloid deposits in muscle tissue may cause muscle weakness and muscle changes (pseudomyopathy). Symptoms of amyloidosis may also be manifested by bleeding disorders. These may result from deficiency of certain clotting factors or small amyloid deposits in blood vessels within the skin.Dialysis-related beta2-microglobulin amyloidosis usually affects the bones and joints. Initial symptoms include carpal tunnel syndrome, shoulder pain and inflammation of the tendon sheaths of the hands. Case reports of severe pulmonary hypertension and heart failure also exist.

