Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

synonyms:
ALSLou Gehrig's Disease

overview:
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the progressive degeneration and eventual death of nerve cells (neurons) in the brain, brainstem and spinal cord. The neurons involved in ALS facilitate communication between the nervous system and voluntary muscles of the body (motor neurons). Normally, motor neurons in the brain (upper motor neurons) send messages to motor neurons in the spinal cord and brainstem (lower motor neurons), which then relay the message to various muscles. ALS affects both the upper and lower motor neurons so that the transmission of messages is interrupted and muscles gradually weaken and waste away. As a result, the ability to initiate and control voluntary movement is lost. ALS affects the muscles needed to move the arms and legs, to speak and swallow, to support the neck and trunk, and to breathe. The symptoms of ALS progress over time and, ultimately, the disease leads to ventilatory failure because affected individuals lose the ability to control muscles in the chest and diaphragm. Although two therapies are approved to slow the progression of the disease by a small amount (disease-modifying therapy) in the United States, the mainstay of therapy for ALS is centered on symptom control and supportive care.

symptoms:
ALS causes a combination of upper and lower motor neuron disease, and the symptoms vary depending on the muscle controlled by the affected neurons and whether upper or lower motor neurons are predominantly affected. The main manifestations of upper motor neuron disease are muscle weakness, increased muscle tone and stiffness (spasticity), increased reflexes (hyperreflexia), and abnormal speech and swallowing. Lower motor neuron disease causes muscle weakness and wasting (atrophy), decreased muscle tone, decreased reflexes (hyporeflexia), twitching of muscle fibers (fasciculations), muscle cramps, and abnormalities of speech, swallowing, and breathing. When ALS affects the limb and trunk muscles, it leads to symptoms such as difficulty walking or falls and difficulty performing activities of daily living. When ALS affects nerves of the head and neck (cranial nerves), it can leads to bulbar symptoms, which include difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) or speaking (dysarthria) and weakness of the muscles of the face or tongue. Dysphagia can lead to complications such as difficulty feeding, choking, excess saliva or drooling, and weight loss. Dysphagia can also lead to pneumonia because of aspiration of food contents (aspiration pneumonia), when food or liquids enter the airway due to dysfunctional swallowing. Bulbar symptoms can also include emotional lability characterized by episodes of sudden, uncontrollable, and inappropriate laughing or crying (pseudobulbar affect).
Although the symptoms of ALS can begin at any time in adulthood, they most commonly manifest in individuals between 55 and 75 years old. Genetic forms of ALS with childhood onset are very rare. Early in the disease, patients can present with either or both upper and lower motor neuron symptoms. Symptoms most commonly begin in the extremities (spinal-onset ALS). Symptoms that develop in the limbs can affect either or both the upper and lower extremities and are typically more pronounced on one side (asymmetric) initially. Early on, the symptoms of ALS can be subtle and include slight muscle weakness, clumsy hand movements, and/or difficulty performing tasks that require delicate movements of the fingers and/or hands. Muscle weakness in the legs may cause tripping and falling. About a third of patients initially present with predominant bulbar symptoms (bulbar-onset ALS). More rarely, patients might initially present with breathing symptoms such as shortness of breath (dyspnea) because of weakness of the ventilatory muscles. ALS is a neurodegenerative disease, so the symptoms progress and become worse over time; muscles become more severely affected and additional muscles become involved. The disease may progress quickly or slowly. As ALS progresses, typically over the course of three to five years, the individual will gradually lose the ability to stand or walk. In time, many patients will require mechanical assistance to breath and are at increased risk for ventilatory failure. A small percentage of people with ALS experience a gradual stabilization of symptoms and may maintain that level (plateau) for a few months or rarely years.
Although ALS is predominantly seen as a disease affecting motor neurons, non-motor symptoms can be observed in up to half of affected individuals. In fact, about 10% of patients are concurrently affected by a disease known as behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) and can develop cognitive impairment and behavioral symptoms such as disinhibition, overeating and compulsive or inappropriate behavior (for more information on this disorder, choose “frontotemporal degeneration” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database). Other non-motor symptoms that can be seen in ALS include cognitive impairment and behavioral changes that are typically less marked than in patients with FTD, mood alterations such as depression and pseudobulbar affect (as described above). In addition, patients with ALS might be at an increased risk of developing blood clots due to decreased mobility.

