Anaplastic Astrocytoma

synonyms:
astrocytoma, grade IIImalignant astrocytoma, grade III

overview:
Anaplastic astrocytoma is a rare malignant brain tumor. Astrocytomas are tumors that develop from certain star-shaped brain cells called astrocytes. Astrocytes and similar cells form tissue that surrounds and protects other nerve cells found within the brain and spinal cord. Collectively, these cells are known as glial cells and the tissue they form is known as glial tissue. Tumors that arise from glial tissue, including astrocytomas, are collectively referred to as gliomas. The symptoms of anaplastic astrocytomas vary depending upon the specific location and size of the tumor. The specific cause of this tumor is unknown.
Astrocytomas are classified according to a grading system developed by the World Health Organization (WHO). Astrocytomas come in four grades based upon how fast the cells are reproducing and that likelihood that they will spread (infiltrate) nearby tissue. Grades I or II astrocytomas are nonmalignant and may be referred to as low-grade. Grades III and IV astrocytomas are malignant and may be referred to as high-grade astrocytomas. Anaplastic astrocytomas are grade III astrocytomas. Grade IV astrocytomas are known as glioblastoma multiforme. Lower grade astrocytomas can change into higher grade astrocytomas over time.

symptoms:
The symptoms of anaplastic astrocytoma vary depending upon the exact location and size of the tumor. Most symptoms result from increased pressure within the brain. An anaplastic astrocytoma usually develops slowly over time, but may develop rapidly.
Increased pressure within the brain may be caused by the tumor itself or by blockage of the fluid-filled spaces in the brain called ventricles, which results in the abnormal accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the brain. Symptoms commonly associated with anaplastic astrocytomas include headaches, lethargy or drowsiness, vomiting, and changes in personality or mental status. In some cases, seizures, vision problems, weakness of the arms and legs resulting in coordination difficulties may also occur.
More specific symptoms relate to the area of brain where the tumor is located. Anaplastic astrocytomas may develop in any area of the central nervous system, although there is a strong preference for the large rounded portion of the brain (cerebrum) that occupies most of the skull. The cerebrum is divided into two halves known as the cerebral hemispheres. Anaplastic astrocytomas may develop in the frontal, temporal, parietal and occipital lobes of the cerebrum.
A tumor in the frontal lobe may cause memory problems, changes in personality and mood, and paralysis (hemiplegia) on the side of the body opposite of the tumor. Tumors in the temporal lobe may cause seizures, memory problems, and problems with coordination and speech. Tumors in the parietal lobe may cause difficulties with communication through writing (agraphia), problems with fine motor skills, or sensory abnormalities such as tingling or burning sensations (paresthesias). Tumors in the occipital lobe can cause visual loss.
Other common sites for anaplastic astrocytomas include the part of the brain that contains the thalamus and hypothalamus (diencephalon), the lower area of brain near the back of the neck that controls movement and balance (cerebellum), and the spinal cord. Tumors in the diencephalon region may cause headaches, fatigue, weakness of the arms and legs, vision problems, and hormonal imbalances. Tumors in the cerebellum may cause headaches, changes in personality or behavior, and balance problems. Tumors of spinal cord may cause back pain, sensory abnormalities such as tingling or burning sensations (paresthesias), weakness, and gait disturbances.

