Andersen-Tawil Syndrome

synonyms:
Andersen syndromeATSlong QT syndrome 7LQTS7

overview:
Summary

Andersen-Tawil syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by episodes of muscle weakness and paralysis (periodic paralysis); abnormalities affecting the electrical system of the heart that can cause abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias); and a variety of distinctive facial and skeletal features. The specific symptoms and severity can vary greatly from one person to another, even among members of the same family. Some individuals will not develop all of the characteristic findings. Distinctive facial features may be so mild as to go unnoticed. In some cases, Andersen-Tawil syndrome is caused by mutations in theKCNJ2gene; in other cases, the associated gene is unknown. TheKCNJ2gene mutation can occur randomly for unknown reasons (sporadically) or be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.

Introduction

Andersen-Tawil syndrome is sometimes referred to as long QT syndrome 7 because some individuals in early reports of the disorder had a prolonged QT interval, which is measured on an electrocardiogram and indicates that the heart muscle is taking longer than usual to recharge between beats. However, subsequent clinical reports have shown the QT interval is not prolonged or only mildly prolonged in most cases. Instead, the Q-U interval is markedly prolonged. In addition, unlike most forms of long QT syndrome, Andersen-Tawil syndrome is associated with symptoms in addition to disturbances of the electrical system of the heart. Although still sub-classified as a form of long QT syndrome, the disorder is recognized as separate from traditional long QT syndromes.
Andersen-Tawil syndrome can also be classified as a form of periodic paralysis, a group of rare neuromuscular disorders characterized by episodes of weakness or paralysis. The terms Andersen-Tawil syndrome type 1 or type 2 are also used in the medical literature. Type 1 refers to cases caused by a knownKCNJ2gene mutation; type 2 refers to cases without an identifiedKCNJ2mutation.

symptoms:
Andersen-Tawil syndrome is defined by three main features (i.e. a clinical triad), specifically periodic paralysis, arrhythmias and heart abnormalities, and distinctive physical features. However, the disorder is highly variable and not all affected individuals will develop all three of these characteristic symptoms. Andersen-Tawil syndrome can vary greatly in expression and severity from one person to another, even among members of the same family.
Although researchers have established a clear syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about the disorder is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified cases, the lack of large clinical studies, and the possibility of other genes influencing the disorder prevent physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Parents should talk to their children’s physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
Affected individuals may experience temporary episodes of flaccid, muscle weakness or paralysis, known as periodic paralysis. The legs are most often affected and the severity of muscle weakness can range from mild weakness to an inability to walk unassisted. The arms, hands, legs and feet are also commonly affected. The frequency and duration of episodes varies from one person to another and from one episode to the next for the same person. Some episodes may last only minutes to hours; others can go on for days. Episodes can occur without warning (spontaneously), but can also occur following prolonged exercise, prolonged rest (e.g. upon awaking in the morning), rest after exercise, going too long without eating, eating a large meal, or emotional stress. Episodes can range in frequency from once per day to once per year. In some cases, a mild, but permanent weakness, present even between episodes, can develop with age and progress slowly over time.
In most cases, periodic paralysis may be associated with low levels of potassium in the blood (hypokalemia), a common finding with other forms of periodic paralysis. However, some individuals who experience periodic paralysis have had normal potassium levels or even elevated levels (hyperkalemia). Low potassium levels can also impact the function of heart muscle cells.
Affected individuals may experience disturbances of the normal rhythm of the heartbeat (arrhythmias), which can include abnormally fast heartbeats that originate in the lower chamber of the heart (ventricular tachycardia). Generally, this may not cause any symptoms (asymptomatic) or may cause shortness of breath or palpitations. In some cases, these arrhythmias may cause episodes of fainting or loss of consciousness (syncope). In severe cases, the possibility of cardiac arrest and sudden death exists. Although sudden death due to the cardiac abnormalities has occurred in Andersen-Tawil syndrome, it is extremely rare.
Some affected individuals also have characteristic physical features including distinctive facial features, which are often mild in expression. Such features include a broad forehead, low-set ears, eyes that are spaced apart wider than usual (hypertelorism), and a small jaw (micrognathia). Additional facial features include a round (bulbous) nose, a thin upper lip, a triangular-shaped face, highly-arched roof of the mouth (palate), a cleft palate, and underdevelopment of the cheek bones (malar hypoplasia). Common physical features include webbing (syndactyly) of the second and/or third toes, pinkies that are fixed in a bent or crooked position (clinodactyly), and disproportionately small fingers and toes (brachydactyly). Additional findings include small hands and feet, loose joints, and abnormal sideways curvature of the spine (scoliosis). Dental anomalies have also been reported including delayed loss of primary or ‘baby’ teeth (persistent primary dentition), multiple missing teeth (oligodontia), and teeth that are abnormally crowded together.
As affected children grow into adulthood, short stature may become evident. Short stature refers to an individual whose height is much shorter than would otherwise be expected based upon age and gender.
Some individuals with Andersen-Tawil syndrome have experienced neuropsychiatric abnormalities including mild learning disabilities, depression, and deficits in executive functioning and abstract reasoning. Some infants experience seizures without fever (afebrile seizures).

