Aniridia Cerebellar Ataxia Mental Deficiency

synonyms:
Aniridia-Cerebellar Ataxia-Mental RetardationAniridia, Partial-Cerebellar Ataxia-Mental RetardationAniridia, Partial-Cerebellar Ataxia-OligophreniaGillespie Syndrome

overview:
Aniridia, cerebellar ataxia, and mental deficiency, also known as Gillespie syndrome, is an extremely rare inherited disorder that is characterized by the absence, in whole (aniridia) or in part (partial aniridia), of the colored portion (iris) of the eye; impaired coordination of voluntary movements due to underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the brain’s cerebellum (cerebellar ataxia); and mental retardation. The condition usually affects both eyes (bilateral) but a few cases have been reported in which only one eye is affected. Some individuals with this syndrome also exhibit a delay in the acquisition of skills requiring coordination of muscular and mental activity (psychomotor retardation). ACAMD is thought to be inherited as an autosomal recessive genetic trait and is extremely rare, with only 20 to 30 cases reported in the medical literature.

symptoms:
Aniridia-cerebellar ataxia-mental deficiency, also known as Gillespie syndrome, is an extremely rare inherited disorder that is characterized by malformations of the eye, neuromuscular abnormalities, developmental delays, and/or mental retardation.  Some affected individuals may also exhibit additional physical abnormalities.
The eye abnormality most frequently associated with this disorder is the partial or complete absence of the colored portion (iris) of the eye, resulting in poor vision.  Both eyes are usually affected (bilateral).  The inner edge of the iris that normally surrounds the pupil (pupillary margin of iris) may be absent, as may be the circular band of muscle fibers in the iris that reduces the size of the pupil (sphincter pupillae) in response to light.  In many cases, people with aniridia may also exhibit repeated, involuntary movements of the eye (nystagmus).  In addition, during late childhood or early adolescence, the pressure of the fluid in the eye may become abnormally high (glaucoma) in some individuals with aniridia, potentially leading to progressive loss of vision.
Individuals with aniridia-cerebellar ataxia-mental deficiency may also have additional eye abnormalities, such as excessive widening (dilatation) of the pupils (mydriasis) and/or extreme sensitivity to light (photophobia).  In addition, they may exhibit droopy eyelids (ptosis); inward deviation of one eye (esotropia), resulting in double vision (diplopia); and/or farsightedness (hypermetropia), causing blurred vision, eye strain, and/or difficulty in viewing close objects.
Aniridia-cerebellar ataxia-mental deficiency is also characterized by neuromuscular abnormalities, such as an impaired ability to coordinate voluntary movement due to incomplete development (hypoplasia) of the cerebellum (cerebellar ataxia).  The cerebellum is the part of the brain that plays a role in maintaining balance and posture as well as coordinating voluntary movement.  People with this disorder may walk unsteadily and have difficulty positioning the feet and turning (cerebellar gait); they may also speak slowly and haltingly, with pauses between each syllable (scanning speech).  Affected individuals may also exhibit severely diminished muscle tone (hypotonia).  The cerebellar ataxia does not seem to worsen over time in individuals with this disorder (non-progressive cerebellar ataxia); in fact, in some cases, the control of certain voluntary movements may improve with age.
People with this disorder may also exhibit developmental abnormalities, such as a delay in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of muscular and mental activity (psychomotor retardation).  As a result, they may achieve certain developmental milestones (e.g., crawling, walking, speaking, etc.) later than normally expected.  Mild to moderate mental retardation may also be present.
In rare cases, individuals with aniridia-cerebellar ataxia-mental deficiency may have additional physical abnormalities.  For example, affected individuals have exhibited skeletal malformations, such as fusion of certain bones in the spinal column of the neck (cervical vertebrae), flat feet (pes planus), and/or feet with heels that are abnormally turned inward and soles that are flexed (equinovarus clubfeet).  Other features have included heart abnormalities, such as a heart murmur, and/or abnormal narrowing of the opening between the heart’s right ventricle and the artery that supplies blood to the lung (pulmonary stenosis).

