Anthrax

synonyms:
Black BaineMalignant EdemaMalignant PustuleRagpicker DiseaseSiberian PlagueWoolsorter's disease

overview:
Anthrax is an acute infectious disease caused by the spore-forming bacterium Bacillus anthracis. It is usually a disease of wild and domestic animals, including cattle, sheep, and goats. However, human infection, while rare, does occur. Human infection usually results from contact with infected animals or their products. However, anthrax has become of interest because of the possibility that a nation or terrorist group might attempt to use it as a weapon of warfare or terrorism. There are three types of anthrax: cutaneous (through the skin), gastrointestinal, and inhalational.

symptoms:
Symptoms usually appear within seven days of exposure, although in some cases the incubation period has been significantly longer than this.
Cutaneous anthrax begins with a raised area on the skin that itches (pruritic papule). Usually, this occurs on exposed areas, most often on the arms and hands followed by the face and neck. It resembles an insect bite. This area becomes larger and, within one or two days, develops into an ulcer, surrounded by small blisters containing fluid. A characteristic black, crusty spot develops on the affected skin area later and, after a few weeks, begins to loosen and ultimately falls off, leaving a scar. The course of these events is so characteristic that the diagnosis is not often missed by physicians familiar with the disease, even though it is rare.
Gastrointestinal anthrax can present as either intestinal or throat and pharynx (oropharyngeal) disease. The symptoms for intestinal infection include fever, nausea, abdominal pain, vomiting, and anorexia. As the disease progresses, there may also be vomiting of blood, bloody diarrhea, toxemia, shock and a bluish tinge to the skin and mucous membranes (cyanosis). Symptoms for oropharyngeal illness may include fever, sore throat, difficulty in swallowing (dysphagia), collection of fluid (edema) in the tissues of the throat, and swelling of the lymph nodes.
Inhalational anthrax typically begins with one to three days of fatigue, low-grade fever, and dry cough. These symptoms, typical of a mild upper respiratory tract infection, may be accompanied by an ache of feeling of heaviness in the chest and the area just below the chest. Following this relatively mild onset, there will be a period of more intense illness characterized by high fever, elevation of the pulse and respiratory rate, heavy perspiration (profuse diaphoresis), and difficult or labored breathing (dyspnea).

