Antisynthetase Syndrome

synonyms:
anti-synthetase syndromeAS syndromeASSD

overview:
Antisynthetase syndrome is a rare, chronic disorder that can affect multiple systems of the body. The disorder is immune-mediated, which means there is inflammation resulting from abnormal functioning of the immune system and the presence of specific autoantibodies that target specific proteins in the body. The symptoms and severity of the disorder can vary greatly among affected individuals. Common symptoms include inflammation of the muscles (myositis), inflammation of several joints (polyarthritis), interstitial lung disease and thickening and cracking (fissuring) and discoloration of the skin of the fingers, called mechanic’s hands). Some individuals develop pain and numbness or a prickly feeling in the fingers and toes in response to cold (Raynaud phenomenon). During a Raynaud episode, the fingers or toes may turn white or blue.
Affected individuals can also have nonspecific symptoms like fatigue, unexplained fevers and unintended weight loss. The exact, underlying cause is not fully understood, but some genetic and environmental risk factors have been identified. Antisynthetase syndrome sometimes occurs along with other conditions such as uncommon inflammatory muscle diseases like dermatomyositis or polymyositis.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms can vary greatly from one person to another. Every person is unique and how the disorder will affect them can be very different. Symptoms can develop rapidly. Affected individuals will usually not have all of the symptoms discussed below. For example, some affected individuals will have little muscle involvement, but prominent signs of lung disease. Muscle disease, interstitial lung disease and arthritis are generally considered the three main symptoms of this disorder (the classic triad), but they may not develop at the same time.
Antisynthetase syndrome can affect the muscles. Muscle inflammation (myositis), muscle pain (myalgia) and muscle stiffness is common. These abnormalities can lead to muscle weakness. Inflammation of several joints of the body (polyarthritis) may also occur. Polyarthritis is associated with pain and stiffness of the affected joints. The surrounding bone is usually not affected (non-erosive arthritis).
Some individuals develop interstitial lung disease, which is characterized by progressive inflammation and scarring of the lungs, particularly of the tissue and space around the tiny air sacs, or alveoli. This area is called the interstitium. This can lead to shortness of breath and coughing. In some instances, progressive damage to the lungs can lead to respiratory insufficiency (when the lungs cannot deliver sufficient levels of oxygen to the body) requiring oxygen treatment and, eventually, life-threatening respiratory failure.
Nonspecific symptoms can also occur including unexplained fevers, fatigue, loss of appetite, unintended weight loss, difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) and skin rashes including a heliotropic rash, a distinctive reddish-purple rash on the upper eyelid or across the cheeks and bridge of the nose in a ‘butterfly’ pattern.

