Appendiceal Cancer and Tumors

synonyms:
low grade mucinous neoplasm of the appendix (LAMN)high grade mucinous neoplasms of the appendix (HAMN)mucinous adenocarcinoma of the appendixadenocarcinoma of the appendixsignet ring cell cancer of the appendixgoblet cell carcinoidcystadenocarcinomanonmucinous adenocarcinomacolonic type adenocarcinoma

overview:
Summary
Cancers and tumors (neoplasms) of the appendix are extremely rare with an estimated incidence of 0.15-0.9 per 100,000 people. The average age of onset is between 50 and 55 years, and they affect men and women equally. They most typically present either as appendicitis, a hernia filled with mucin, increasing abdominal girth, abdominal discomfort, an abdominal/pelvic mass, as an incidental finding on some form of imaging or at the time of surgery for a different indication. In women, they often spread to the ovaries and can be easily confused with ovarian cancer. Making the diagnosis of appendiceal cancer requires examination of a tumor specimen. After starting in the appendix, appendiceal tumors and cancers frequently spread inside the abdominal cavity. Depending on the type of tumor or cancer, this can lead to either the build-up of mucinous fluid in the abdomen known as pseudomyxoma peritonei (see separate Rare Disease Report) or a condition referred to as peritoneal carcinomatosis (growth of cancer cells in the abdominal cavity—see Related Disorders section). Treatment for appendiceal tumors and cancers varies depending on the stage (extent) of disease and the subtype.
Introduction
In addition to being quite rare, cancers and tumors of the appendix come in a wide variety of types. The most common type of tumor or cancer that occurs in the appendix is a neuroendocrine or carcinoid tumor. Neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are derived from specialized cells that reside in the wall of the appendix or other part of the intestine called enterochromaffin (EC) cells. EC cells make chemicals that help facilitate gastrointestinal motility and digestion. NETs (or carcinoid cancers) of the appendix have a unique tumor biology and are treated differently than epithelial tumors or cancers of the appendix which arise from gland-forming cells lining the inside of the appendix. One of the functions of epithelial cells is to make mucin – a jelly-like substance that helps protect the lining of the intestine.
Epithelial tumors and cancers of the appendix are further categorized based upon how the cells look microscopically and whether or not they are invading the wall of the appendix. The main categories include goblet cell carcinoid (see separate Rare Disease Report), low-grade mucinous neoplasm of the appendix (LAMN), high-grade mucinous neoplasm of the appendix (HAMN) and adenocarcinomas. The adenocarcinomas are further classified as:  well- differentiated, moderately-differentiated, poorly-differentiated and signet ring cell (SRC). These classifications are important for determining prognosis and treatment recommendations.

symptoms:
At the time of diagnosis, appendiceal cancer can be either localized to the appendix or have spread to other parts of the body – particularly the abdominal cavity or peritoneum. For appendiceal cancers that are localized, the most common signs and symptoms are those of acute appendicitis – namely right lower abdominal pain. For appendiceal cancers that have already spread away from the appendix, the most common presenting signs and symptoms are vague abdominal discomfort and increasing abdominal girth. In men, the first presenting sign may be a hernia that gets distended by mucin. In women, the first presenting sign may be a pelvic mass that is presumed to be ovarian cancer. Due to the very thin wall of the appendix, finding appendiceal cancer that has already spread at the time of diagnosis is more common than finding it confined to the appendix.
Due to the structure of the appendix (a long, thin-walled, finger-like projection off the right colon), it is easy for tumor or cancer cells to break through the wall and spread in the abdominal cavity. Consequently, most appendiceal cancers, even the less aggressive ones, tend to present at an advanced stage with peritoneal carcinomatosis. Once the cancer cells have spread, they continue to grow and may cause abdominal discomfort, distention, a fluid build-up called ascites or pseudomyoma peritonei (mucinous ascites), and intestinal blockage or dysfunction. Over time this can lead to decreased appetite, early satiety (feeling full after eating only a small amount), nausea and vomiting.
Appendiceal cancers rarely spread outside the abdominal cavity, and it is most commonly seen in poorly-differentiated or signet ring cell (SRC) cancers. However, once the cancer cells escape from the appendix, they can continue to grow in the abdominal cavity, on the surface of other organs such as the omentum, intestines, ovaries, uterus, liver, spleen and peritoneum (lining of the abdominal cavity).  This condition is called peritoneal carcinomatosis (see Related Disorders) – which means growth of cancer cells within the abdominal cavity. Over time, without treatment, this condition can result in blockage of the intestines or loss of intestinal function.

