Arginase-1 Deficiency

synonyms:
hyperargininemiaarginase deficiency

overview:
SummaryArginase-1 deficiency is a rare inherited disorder characterized by complete or partial lack of the enzyme arginase in the liver and red blood cells. Arginase is one of six enzymes that play a role in the breakdown and removal of nitrogen from the body, a process known as the urea cycle. The lack of the arginase enzyme results in excessive accumulation of nitrogen, in the form of ammonia (hyperammonemia), in the blood and arginine (hyperarginemia) in the blood and cerebrospinal fluid. Untreated children may exhibit seizures, progressive spasticity, short stature and intellectual disability. Most affected infants can now be identified at birth through newborn screening. Arginase-1 deficiency is inherited as an autosomal recessive genetic disorder.
IntroductionThe urea cycle disorders are a group of rare disorders affecting the urea cycle, a series of biochemical processes in which nitrogen is converted into urea and removed from the body through the urine. Nitrogen is a waste product of protein metabolism. Failure to break down nitrogen results in the abnormal accumulation of nitrogen, in the form of ammonia, in the blood. In arginase-1 deficiency the accumulation of arginine in the body and not excess ammonia is the predominant biochemical and pathological abnormality.

symptoms:
Symptoms associated with arginase-1 deficiency differ from those associated with other disorders of the urea cycle. Most infants with arginase-1 deficiency do not exhibit any symptoms during the first few months to a year of life. Infants with arginase-1 deficiency infrequently experience severe hyperammonemia or hyperammonemic coma, which are characteristic of the other urea cycle disorders.
Affected children may experience a lag in growth between one and three years and may walk on their toes and develop progressive stiffness and lack of control of voluntary movements of the legs (spastic diplegia). Cognitive development slows or stops and if untreated, children develop severe spasticity, an inability to walk, loss of bowel and bladder control and severe intellectual disability.
Almost all affected children have growth deficiency and many also experience seizures.

