Argininosuccinic Aciduria

synonyms:
arginino succinase deficiencyargininosuccinate lyase deficiencyargininosuccinate acid lyase deficiencyASAASL deficiency

overview:
Summary
Argininosuccinic aciduria is a rare genetic disorder characterized by deficiency or lack of the enzyme argininosuccinate lyase (ASL). This enzyme is one of six enzymes that play a role in the breakdown and removal of nitrogen from the body, a process known as the urea cycle. The lack of this argininosuccinate lyase results in excessive accumulation of nitrogen, in the form of ammonia (hyperammonemia), in the blood. Ammonia is a neurotoxin, which means that it damages or inhibits the function of neurons, the cells of the central nervous system. Excess ammonia travels to the central nervous system through the blood, resulting in the symptoms and physical findings associated with the disorder. Affected infants may experience vomiting, refusal to eat, progressive lethargy and coma. Argininosuccinic aciduria is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.  Symptoms unrelated to high ammonia may occur in some patients because of additional roles of this enzyme in the body.
Introduction
Urea cycle disorders are a group of rare disorders affecting the urea cycle, a series of biochemical processes in which nitrogen is converted into urea and removed from the body through the urine. Nitrogen is a waste product of protein metabolism. Failure to break down nitrogen results in the abnormal accumulation of nitrogen, in the form of ammonia, in the blood.

symptoms:
The severity and specific symptoms of argininosuccinic aciduria varies from one person to another. A severe form of the disorder, which is characterized by a complete or near complete lack of the ASL enzyme, occurs shortly after birth (neonatal period). A milder form of the disorder, which is characterized by partial lack of the ASL enzyme, affects some individuals later during infancy or childhood or even adulthood (late-onset form).
Symptoms are caused by the accumulation of ammonia in the blood. The severe form occurs within 24-72 hours after birth, usually following a protein feeding. This form is initially characterized by a refusal to eat, lethargy, lack of appetite, vomiting and irritability. Affected infants may also experience seizures, breathing (respiratory) abnormalities, accumulation of fluid in the brain (cerebral edema) and an abnormally large liver (hepatomegaly). Less commonly, some individuals develop progressive liver disease and dysfunction such as the buildup of scar tissue (fibrosis) and cirrhosis. In rare instances, chronic kidney (renal) disease has been reported. Abnormally rapid breathing (tachypnea) may be detected and sometimes is the first sign recognized of elevated ammonia in the blood. As affected individuals grow older, they may have coarse and brittle (friable) hair that breaks off easily and can leave patches of hair loss, a condition known as trichorrhexis nodosa.
In some patients, due to high levels of ammonia in the blood (hyperammonemic coma), the disorder may progress to coma. In these patients, argininosuccinic aciduria may potentially result in neurological abnormalities including delays in reaching developmental milestones (developmental delays) and intellectual disability. The severity of such neurological abnormalities is more severe in infants who are in hyperammonemic coma for more than three days. If left untreated, the disorder will result in life-threatening complications. However, even individuals without significant hyperammonemia may develop neurological abnormalities suggesting alternative causes of injury.
In infants with partial enzyme deficiency, onset of the disorder may not occur until later during infancy or childhood (late onset form). Symptoms may include failure to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive), avoidance of protein from the diet, inability to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia), lethargy and vomiting. Affected infants and children may also have dry, brittle hair. Some individuals with the late onset form may not develop any symptoms (asymptomatic).
Infants with the mild form may alternate between periods of wellness and hyperammonemia. Episodes of hyperammonemia are usually triggered by acute infection, stress, certain medications or not following the recommended dietary restrictions (e.g., high protein intake or also insufficient, too low protein intake). Other individuals with the mild form may not have any documented episodes of hyperammonemia but can still develop behavioral abnormalities such as attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, cognitive impairment and learning disabilities.
Both the severe and late-onset forms of argininosuccinic aciduria can be associated with long-term complications including liver dysfunction, neurocognitive deficits such as cognitive impairment, seizures, brittle hair and high blood pressure (hypertension). These long-term complications appear to be unrelated to the frequency, length or severity of episodes of hyperammonemia. Increasingly, high blood pressure has been diagnosed in some but not all children and adults with this condition. This may be due to an inability of the body to generate a chemical called nitric oxide.

