Arginine Vasopressin Deficiency

synonyms:
AVP-Dcentral diabetes insipidusneurogenic diabetes insipidusneurohypophyses diabetes insipidusvasopressin-sensitive diabetes insipidus

overview:
Summary
Arginine vasopressin deficiency (AVP-D) is a rare disorder characterized by excessive thirst (polydipsia) and excessive urination (polyuria). AVP-D is a distinct disorder caused by complete or partial deficiency of the hormone arginine vasopressin, or AVP. AVP is released from the posterior pituitary (part of the brain) when the body senses a need for more hydration. In response to AVP, the kidneys produce more concentrated urine and conserve water in the body. Individuals with AVP-D produce large quantities of dilute urine regardless of their hydration status. If they do not have access to water to drink, dehydration may occur. Eventually, more serious symptoms can develop including changes in consciousness and confusion associated with dehydration and elevation in blood sodium concentration (hypernatremic dehydration). Treatment of AVP-D with AVP analogues can also predispose to low blood sodium concentration (hyponatremia), can produce headache, malaise, fatigue, and when profound, seizure, coma, or even death. AVP-D may be caused by any condition that affects the creation, transport or release of AVP. AVP-D may be inherited or acquired. In some cases, no cause can be identified (idiopathic).
Introduction
Arginine vasopressin deficiency was formerly called central diabetes insipidus or CDI. The name of this disorder was changed to avoid medical errors related to confusion between central diabetes insipidus and diabetes mellitus. AVP-D is not related to the more common diabetes mellitus (sugar diabetes), in which the body does not produce or properly use insulin.

symptoms:
AVP-D symptoms may develop abruptly or more gradually over time and may occur at any age. Typically, individuals experience excessive urination (polyuria), even at night (nocturia), and as a result, excessive thirst (polydipsia). Some individuals with AVP-D lack thirst (adipsia) and are thus more vulnerable to dehydration from untreated AVP-D, and also hyponatremia from possible inadvertent excess fluid and synthetic AVP. The severity and progression of AVP-D varies from person to person. Some individuals may have a severe form of the disorder (complete AVP-D) with little or no AVP activity. Others may have a milder form of the disorder (partial AVP-D) with residual AVP activity.
Without appropriate AVP secretion, individuals with AVP-D are unable to concentrate the urine by reabsorbing water in the kidneys. This results in excessive production of dilute urine. Consequently, individuals must drink excessively to prevent dehydration. In response to thirst, affected individuals may drink copious quantities of water each day. If affected individuals are deprived of water to drink, dehydration can develop rapidly. Thirst cravings can be strong enough to awaken people from sleep.
Infants are unable to express thirst or independently seek water, thus their symptoms are more related to developing dehydration and high sodium levels in the blood. These include irritability, lethargy, vomiting, constipation and fever. If left untreated, repeated episodes of dehydration can potentially result in seizures, brain damage, developmental delays, and physical and intellectual disability. However, with proper diagnosis and prompt treatment, neurologic development can be preserved unless there are underlying associated problems in the brain (e.g., congenital anatomic abnormalities, tumors) that jeopardize these processes. Older children may also have bedwetting (enuresis), fatigue, weight loss and growth impairments, the latter because they drink so much water that they are unable to eat enough to achieve sufficient nutrition.
Individuals with AVP-D are at risk of developing dehydration and cardiovascular symptoms from electrolyte abnormalities including abnormal heart rhythms. They can also experience fever, dry skin and mucous membranes, confusion, seizures and alterations in consciousness. Symptoms can even potentially progress to lethargy and coma. Individuals with AVP-D may also develop orthostatic hypotension, a condition in which there is a substantial decrease in blood pressure upon standing or sitting. Orthostatic hypotension can result in dizziness or momentary loss of consciousness (syncope). Treatment of AVP-D with fluids and synthetic AVP can make individuals vulnerable to low sodium levels (hyponatremia), which has non-specific symptoms, including headache, fatigue and nausea. When severe, hyponatremia can lead to seizures or coma, and can even be fatal. Rapid correction of sodium concentration from either extreme can also lead to serious neurologic injury or death, thus treatment must be carefully monitored.

