Aromatic L-Amino Acid Decarboxylase Deficiency

synonyms:
aromatic amino acid decarboxylase deficiencyAADC deficiencyAADCDDOPA decarboxylase deficiencyDDC deficiency

overview:
Summary
Aromatic l-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) deficiency is a very rare genetic disorder. Affected individuals can appear normal at birth, but most will develop symptoms during the first months of life. Symptoms can include abnormal eye movements, movement disorders (especially dystonia) and autonomic dysfunction (excessive sweating, temperature instability, drooping eyelids [ptosis}, nasal congestion and a low level of glucose in the blood [hypoglycemic episodes]). Sleep disturbances are common and may include difficulty sleeping, difficulty staying awake or both. Mood disturbances such as irritability and anxiety are also frequently observed. Brain MRI results are typically normal or may show non-specific abnormalities. Seizures are rare. People with AADC deficiency have a decreased activity of aromatic l-amino acid decarboxylase, an enzyme involved in the building (synthesis) of neurotransmitters (dopamine and serotonin), which are responsible for the communication between neurons in the nervous system.
Medication is available to manage the symptoms, but response to treatment greatly varies among affected individuals, and an optimal treatment regimen can be difficult to achieve. The gene therapy eladocagene exuparvovec (Upstaza) has been approved in the European Union and United Kingdom for individuals aged 18 months and older diagnosed with AADC deficiency, confirmed clinically, molecularly and genetically, who have severe disease. This treatment is not currently approved by the FDA for use in the United States.

symptoms:
The symptoms of AADC deficiency can begin shortly after birth or when the child is a few months old. There is a wide range of possible symptoms, and the severity of the disease varies among affected individuals. The two most common symptoms are low muscle tone (hypotonia) in the trunk and oculogyric crises. These crises are characterized by abnormal rotation of the eyeballs and gaze deviation, uncontrolled movements of the head and neck, muscle spasms, agitation and irritability. They can last several hours and tend to recur every 2 to 5 days. Other movement disorders can be present such as decreased movements (hypokinesia), increased muscle tone (hypertonia) in the limbs, sustained muscle contraction and abnormal postures (dystonia), involuntary writhing movements (athetosis), involuntary and irregular movements of the hands and feet (chorea) and tremors.
Another prominent feature of AADC deficiency is dysfunction of the autonomic nervous system. This part of the nervous system is not under voluntarily control and is involved in self-regulation of the body. Dysfunction of the autonomic nervous system can lead to symptoms such as excessive sweating and salivation (hypersalivation), droopy eyelids (ptosis), nasal congestion, temperature instability, low blood pressure (hypotension) and low blood sugar (hypoglycemia). Less common symptoms include seizures, behavioral problems such as irritability and excessive crying, decreased or increased sleep (insomnia and hypersomnia, respectively) and decreased or increased reflexes (hyporeflexia and hyperreflexia, respectively).
Another relatively common non-neurologic feature is gastrointestinal problems such as diarrhea, constipation and reflux. Because of the disease itself and because of the numerous possible symptoms, children with AADC deficiency have developmental delay and are not able to reach normal milestones such as walking and talking, have feeding difficulties and decreased growth (failure to thrive) and are prone to many medical complications. Patients might also have difficulty adapting to those complications as their autonomic nervous system is dysfunctional and can react inappropriately to stressors such as surgery or infections. Many affected children unfortunately do not live through childhood, but some with milder disease do reach adulthood. Importantly, the condition of people living with the disease can deteriorate because of complications, but the symptoms do not tend to worsen with time. Some patients eventually develop cerebral palsy.

