Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome

synonyms:
ATS

overview:
Summary
Arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS) is an extremely rare genetic disorder characterized by lengthening (elongation) and twisting or distortion (tortuosity) of arteries throughout the body. Arteries are the blood vessels that carry oxygen-rich blood away from the heart. Affected arteries are prone to developing balloon-like bulges (aneurysms) on the wall of the artery, tearing (dissection), or narrowing (stenosis). The main artery that carries blood from the heart and to the rest of the body (aorta) can be affected. The pulmonary arteries are especially prone to narrowing. Additional symptoms affecting connective tissues entering multiple systems of the body are soft or doughy hyperextensible skin, joint hypermobility, inguinal hernia and diaphragmatic hernia. Skeletal findings include pectus deformities, scoliosis and knee/elbow contractures. Affected individuals may have distinctive facial features that are noticeable at birth or during early childhood. Arterial tortuosity syndrome can potentially cause severe life-threatening complications during infancy or early childhood, although individuals with milder symptoms have also been described. Arterial tortuosity syndrome is caused by variants in theSLC2A10gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
Introduction
Arterial tortuosity syndrome is a connective tissue disorder. Connective tissues are the major components of the body forming skeleton, joints, skin, vessels and other organs. Connective tissues are characterized by the presence of cells included in an extracellular matrix network of a large variety of proteins (e.g., collagens), proteins bound to sugar chains of big dimension (proteoglycans) and sugars (hyaluronic acid, etc.). This complex mesh of molecules gives the tissue form and strength and ensures the passage of nutrients and factors controlling cell growth and proliferation.

symptoms:
Researchers have been able to establish a clear syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, but much about ATS is not fully understood. It has been difficult to determine a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis because of the small number of identified patients, the lack of large clinical studies and the possibility of other genes influencing the disorder.
Life expectancy seems to be longer than initially observed and in adolescence/adulthood life-threatening cardiovascular events seem to be rare; in adulthood complications commonly observed are chronic systemic and pulmonary hypertension, heart conduction defects, aortic root dilatation, stroke and intracranial aneurysms. The first few months/years of life appear to be the most critical for possible life-threatening events, particularly complications related to stenosis of the pulmonary arteries (PAS) such as acute respiratory symptoms.
It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. For example, affected individuals may have uncomplicated arterial tortuosity without extravascular symptoms or only mild ones. Parents should talk to their children’s physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis. The specific symptoms and severity of ATS can vary greatly from one person to another depending, in part, upon the specific arteries that are affected. Usually, large or medium sized arteries are affected such as the aorta, the pulmonary arteries, the carotid artery and kidney (renal) arteries. In extremely rare cases, blood vessels within the skull can be affected (intracranial arteries). Affected arteries can be abnormally lengthened causing them to become twisted or distorted, possibly forming kinks and loops. Patients with tortuous arteries are prone to aneurysm formation, dissection and ischemic events and other various cardiovascular and respiratory complications. Cardiovascular complications can include high blood pressure of various blood vessels throughout the body (systemic hypertension), enlargement of one of the right chambers (ventricles) of the heart (ventricular hypertrophy), stroke and tissue death caused by lack of oxygen (infarction). Respiratory complications can include acute respiratory symptoms such as repeated pulmonary infections and difficulty breathing or respiratory distress. Eventually, in severe cases, heart or respiratory failure can occur.
Individuals with ATS often have distinctive facial features such as an elongated face, beaked nose, highly arched palate, small chin (micrognathia), an abnormally long groove between the nose and upper lip (long philtrum), widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), down-slanted palpebral fissures, eyelids that are abnormally narrowed horizontally (blepharophimosis or periorbital fullness), an abnormally enlarged head (macrocephaly) and a highly arched roof of the mouth (palate) and dental crowding. Less often, individuals may develop progressive changes in the shape of the cornea (keratoconus), resulting in blurred vision and other vision problems.
The skin of individuals with ATS may be soft, velvety/silky and easily stretched (hyperextensible or hyperelastic) to a variable extent. Cutis laxa can be present. Abnormal scarring due to diminished wound healing can occur with atrophic scars. Skeletal malformations may occur including abnormally long, thin and curved fingers and toes (arachnodactyly), joints that are permanently fixed in a flexed or straightened position (joint contractures especially of knees and elbows), loose (lax) joints, a sunken chest or a chest that protrudes outward, abnormal sideways curvature of the spine (scoliosis) and indentation or protrusion of the chest wall (pectus excavatum/carinatum).
Additional symptoms have been reported in individuals with ATS in some cases. Such symptoms include the development of small, sac-like protrusions or bulges (diverticuli) in the genitourinary tract, protrusion of abdominal tissue or part of the small intestines through a bulge or tear in the abdominal muscles near the groin (inguinal hernias), protrusion of part of the stomach into the chest through an opening in the diaphragm (hiatal hernia), softening or weakening of the cartilage of the trachea (tracheomalacia) and decreased muscle tone (generalized hypotonia).

