Arteriovenous Malformation

synonyms:
AVM

overview:
Arteriovenous malformation (AVM) is a vascular lesion that is a tangle of vessels of varying sizes in which there is one or more direct connections between the arterial and venous circulations. In the lesion there is no capillary bed, which is part of normal tissue. Brain AVMs are often presumed to be congenital, but there is no direct evidence that they form in utero. The distribution of age at detection for brain AVMs is normally-distributed with the mean age in the mid-30’s. Although a small number of AVMs manifest themselves at or shortly after birth, most of them present later in life, and just as likely, form and progress during the later years of life. The lack of capillaries allows blood traveling through the abnormal fistulous connections to flow rapidly. The low resistance of the direct A-V connections, termed fistulas, results in very high flow rates in the vessels leading to and within the AVM. These high flow rates can lower the pressure in the arteries leading to the AVM and to surrounding relatively normal brain tissue. Further, because of the direct A-V connections, the pressure in the arteries, even if somewhat reduced, are transmitted to the veins draining the AVM and surrounding brain, which normally operate at very low pressures. AVM can occur in many different parts of the body, but those located in the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord) can cause problems that affect the brain like other forms of stroke.

symptoms:
Symptoms of AVM occur only after a highly variable amount of damage to the brain or spinal cord has occurred: this ranges from minor symptoms such as headache to devastating rupture with hemorrhagic stroke. A small percentage of AVMs are detected incidentally during investigation of unrelated medical problems and are completely asymptomatic. AVMs cause damage to the brain or spinal cord by several mechanisms: directly reducing oxygen to neurological tissues through (a) a change in vascular pressures; (b) compression of adjacent neural tissue by the abnormal vascular structures of the AVM; (c) bleeding (hemorrhage) into surrounding tissues. Bleeding has several adverse effects including exerting pressure on adjacent neural tissue and also by leaving toxic blood products in contact with neural tissue.
Seizures are the presenting symptom in 15-40% of individuals with AVM. Cerebral hemorrhage can occur when an AVM ruptures and a large amount of blood is released into the brain. Brain hemorrhage causes the presenting symptoms in roughly half of patients with a brain AVM. The risk for cerebral hemorrhage in individuals with AVM is approximately 2-4% per year, but there is a very wide range of bleeding risks depending on the anatomic and physiologic characteristics of the AVM. The annualized rates vary from below 1% to as high as 30%. Seizures are the second most important presentation of AVMs. Headache occurs in 10-50% of those with AVM and may be the presenting symptom. There is no tell-tale (pathognomonic) pattern for seizure or headache.
Not all of the headaches that bring AVMs to clinical attention are due to the lesion. It is often difficult to know if the headaches are related to the AVM. Other neurological symptoms sometimes occur depending on the location of the AVM. These symptoms can include muscle weakness or paralysis in one area of the body; Symptoms also include, but are not limited to, loss of coordination (ataxia) sometimes leading to difficulty walking; difficulty planning tasks (apraxia); dizziness; vision problems; difficulty speaking or understanding others (aphasia); numbness, tingling or pain; memory problems; mental confusion, hallucinations or dementia. One retrospective study demonstrated that approximately two-thirds of individuals with AVM have a history of mild learning disabilities in childhood or adolescence.
Spinal AVMs can present in a number of ways, including sudden and severe back pain that can cause sensory loss, muscle weakness, localized paralysis, or a more gradual onset of neurological problems in sensation or motor function in the extremities.

