Arteritis, Takayasu

synonyms:
Aorta Arch SyndromeBrachiocephalic IschemiaIdiopathic Arteritis of TakayasuMartorell SyndromeOcclusive ThromboaortopathyPulseless DiseaseReverse CoarctionTakayasu DiseaseYoung Female Arteritis

overview:
Takayasu arteritis is a rare disorder characterized by the progressive inflammation of one or more of the larger arteries leading from the heart. The main artery of the heart (aorta) and the pulmonary (lung) artery, among others, may be affected. When this disorder causes progressive inflammation of many arteries, it is known as polyarteritis. One of the consequences of polyarteritis is the reduction of blood flow to any of several organs and/or arms and legs. Arteries in the head and arms may be affected, and this can result in the loss of the major pulse points in the body. Some people with Takayasu arteritis have irregular narrowing of portions of the large arteries (segmental stenosis) and abnormal backward flow of blood from the aorta into the left ventricle of the heart (aortic regurgitation). Other patients may have symptoms of ballooning and weakening (aneurysm) of the wall of a major vessel.

symptoms:
About half of the patients with Takayasu arteritis display a general feeling of weakness (malaise).  In addition, patients may complain of muscle aches (myalgias), and joint pain (arthralgias).  Progressive obstructive arterial disease and narrowing of the arteries (stenosis) may follow the initial phase of the disease.  When the aorta and the major arteries in the neck (carotid arteries) are affected by Takayasu arteritis, the patient usually experiences lightheadedness, dizziness, and brief moments of unconsciousness (syncope). These symptoms are the result of a  decrease in blood supply to the brain (cerebral ischemia).  The pulses that are normally found in the neck and on the temples (carotid and superficial temporal pulses) may be absent. Most often, progression of the arteritis is slow so that there is sufficient time to develop adequate alternate circulation (collateral or secondary circulation).
People with Takayasu arteritis may develop impairment of heart and brain function due to the insufficient flow of blood to these organs.  In some cases an artery may rupture due to weakness of the vessels’ wall (aneurysm), and/or difficulty speaking (aphasia) may occur.  Other symptoms may include episodes of blindness, dim vision, and an abnormal sensitivity to light (photophobia).  Involvement of the arteries in the neck (brachial involvement) may cause weakness in the arms and weakness and cramps in the legs (claudication), cool skin, and the absence of pulses in the wrists (radial).  Blood pressure may be very difficult to measure.
Intermittent attacks of decreased blood flow to the hands and feet (Raynaud’s phenomenon) typically occur in people with Takayasu arteritis. Additional symptoms may include heart murmurs (systolic) and inflammation of the blood vessels that result in nodules under the skin that are red and tender (erythema nodosum).  Sometimes people with Takayasu arteritis experience cloudiness of the lens of the eyes (cataracts) at an early age, and there may be progressive weakness in the muscles and soft tissues of the face.

