Arthrogryposis Renal Dysfunction Cholestasis Syndrome

synonyms:
ARC

overview:
Arthrogryposis renal dysfunction cholestasis syndrome (ARC) is a very rare genetic condition. The condition is present at birth, but symptoms may not be noticed until later in a child’s life. The name of the condition describes the symptoms. Arthrogryposis comes from the Greek word for “bent” describing limbs that are difficult to straighten. Renal dysfunction refers to the kidneys not working. Cholestasis comes from the Greek word for “bile” referring to a problem with the flow of bile, a substance which normally helps the body digest fats.
There are two types of ARC, each caused by variants in a specific gene, but the signs and symptoms are similar for both types. ARC type 1 is caused by variants in theVIPAS39gene. ARC type 2 is caused by variants in theVPS33Bgene.
While it has been thought that babies affected with ARC do not survive beyond the first year of life, usually dying from infection (sepsis), dehydration or too much acid in body fluids (acidosis), we now know that there are “attenuated” or mild cases. There are children now enrolled in elementary school who are known to have ARC type 1.

symptoms:
People with ARC typically have:
Limbs which cannot be straightened (arthrogryposis)Kidneys fail to remove acids from the blood into the urine (renal tubular dysfunction)Abnormal stalling of the flow of bile from the liver, backing up into the blood and other organs (cholestasis)Dry, itchy skin that appears scaly and rough (ichthyosis)Severe problems with eating, gaining weight and growing (failure to thrive)Abnormal findings on brain imaging studies such as irregular lateral-ventricular margin contours and problems with the structure that connects the left and right cerebral hemispheres (corpus callosum dysgenesis) and smooth brain (lissencephaly)Low-set earsDevelopmental delay, meaning children reach milestones such as sitting independently later than other childrenRecurrent nose bleeds and easy bleeding associated with absence of platelet alpha-granulesYellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundiced) due to the dysfunction of the liverLimbs may have decreased muscle mass and weak bones (osteopenia)Low muscle tone (hypotonia)Hips are often dislocatedSkin is severely itchy and thickened (hyperkeratosis)Skin that may be darker than normal (hyperpigmented) and leathery (lichenified)Hearing loss due to damage to the inner ear (sensorineural deafness)Teeth that chip easily due to weak enamelHeart defects (rarely)Fractures at birthToo much acid in the blood (metabolic acidosis)Recurrent fevers

