Arthritis, Infectious

synonyms:
Bacterial ArthritisPurulent ArthritisPyarthrosisPyogenic ArthritisSeptic ArthritisSuppurative Arthritis

overview:
Infectious arthritis is an inflammation of one or more joints that occurs as a result of infection by bacteria, viruses or, less frequently, fungi or parasites. The symptoms of Infectious arthritis depend upon which agent has caused the infection but symptoms often include fever, chills, general weakness, and headaches, followed by inflammation and painful swelling of one or more joints of the body.
Most often, the infection begins at some other location in the body and travels via the bloodstream to the joint. Less commonly, the infection starts in the joint in the course of a surgical procedure, injection or other action.

symptoms:
The symptoms of infectious arthritis depend upon which agent has caused the infection.  The symptoms usually include fever (which may be quite high), chills, general weakness and headaches, followed by inflammation of one or more joints.  The affected joint or joints often become very painful, swollen, slightly red and stiff within a few hours or days.  Rapid onset of symptoms may indicate that a bacterium is the cause.  In a few people, however, the infection develops slowly, over a period of months or even years.  This slower developing infection is more often the result of a viral or fungal infection than a bacterial one.
Infectious arthritis that affects one joint is often, but not always, bacterial in origin.  Occasionally, multiple joints may be involved.  Bacterial infections appear to most often affect the larger joints: knees, ankles, shoulders, hips, elbows or wrists.  The infection occurs less commonly in other, smaller joints as well.  For people who already have some form of arthritis, especially rheumatoid arthritis, the infection may seem like a flare-up of their existing condition.
Symptoms of infectious arthritis caused by a virus vary with the virus involved.  Usually, viral arthritic infections develop more gradually and are more widespread than are bacterial infections, affecting several joints. However, some viral infections may develop quickly and affect only a few joints.
In Lyme disease (one form of infectious arthritis), joint inflammation usually occurs several weeks after onset of other symptoms.  (For more information on Lyme Disease, choose “Lyme” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)

