Asherman’s Syndrome

synonyms:
intrauterine synechiaeuterine synechiaeintrauterine adhesions (IUA)

overview:
Asherman’s syndrome is a rare, acquired, gynecological disorder of the uterus. It is characterized by the bonding of scar tissue that lines the walls of the uterus, which decreases the volume of the uterine cavity. The bonding of uterine scar tissue (intrauterine adhesions or synechiae) may occur as a result of surgical scraping or cleaning of tissue from the uterine wall (dilatation and curettage [D and C]), infections of the endometrium (e.g., genital tuberculosis), or other factors. Asherman’s syndrome  can be severe (greater than 75% of the front and back walls of the uterus can fuse together) to moderate and mild, where only smaller portions of the uterine wall fuses together. Patients can experience a range of symptoms depending on the severity of the disease, including reduced menstrual flow, increased cramping and abdominal pain, eventual stoppage of menstrual cycles (amenorrhea), and, in some women, infertility. Current treatment options include hysteroscopic surgery as well as preventive (Foley catheter) and restorative therapies (hormone treatment). Newer options like stem cell treatments are also currently being explored to treat severe cases of Asherman’s syndrome.

symptoms:
Most patients with Asherman’s syndrome experience menstrual blood flow that is sparse (hypomenorrhea) or absent (amenorrhea) along with increased cramping and abdominal pain. Some patients may experience interrupted menstrual blood flow with substantial pain, while others may not have any abnormal changes to their menstrual cycle or experience any pain. Recurrent miscarriages and/or infertility may also be signs of Asherman’s syndrome. In more severe cases, adhesion of uterine scar tissue can also lead to either a partial or full blockage of the uterus or cervical canal that can cause retrograde menstruation (menstruation blood that flows backwards into the fallopian tubes instead of being expelled from the body).

