Asherson’s Syndrome

synonyms:
Catastrophic Antiphospholipid Syndrome

overview:
Asherson’s syndrome is an extremely rare autoimmune disorder characterized by the development, over a period of hours, days or weeks, of rapidly progressive blood clots affecting multiple organ systems of the body. Conditions such as infections, immunizations, wounds caused due to physical trauma and failure in the anticoagulation mechanism of the body usually act as “triggers”.
The syndrome is particularly common among patients with antiphospholipid syndrome who experience a cessation of the anticoagulation mechanism rleated to recurrent bleeding in the body.  It is usually seen in patients who have previously suffered from a simple/classic episode of antiphospholipid syndrome. It is not known why patients of antiphospholipid syndrome often have the tendency to be “catapulted” into a serious or fatal multiorgan failure, while the same triggers in other individuals may only result in recurrent large vessel thrombosis. The symptoms are also aptly observed in patients during pregnancy or in the weeks after childbirth (puerperium) and may follow the HELLP syndrome or be associated with malignancies.  Symptoms vary from case to case depending upon the specific organ systems involved. Asherson’s syndrome can rapidly result in life-threatening multiorgan failure.
Asherson’s syndrome is a severe variant of antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), an autoimmune disorder in which blood clots occur in relation to the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies in the body. Antibodies are specialized proteins produced by the body’s immune system to fight infection. In autoimmune disorders, antibodies mistakenly attack healthy tissue. In APS and Asherson’s syndrome, antibodies mistakenly attack certain proteins that bind to phospholipids, which are fat molecules that are involved in the proper function of cell membranes. Phospholipids are found throughout the body. The reason these antibodies attack these proteins and the process by which they cause blood clots to form is not known.
Asherson’s syndrome may occur in individuals who have primary or secondary APS or in individuals with lupus or other autoimmune disorders. In some cases, no previous history of these disorders may be present. The exact cause of Asherson’s syndrome is unknown.

symptoms:
The symptoms of Asherson’s syndrome are caused by complications resulting from the development of multiple blood clots (thromboses) in the body. Multiple blood clots may form in a matter of hours, days or weeks, potentially causing life-threatening multiorgan failure.
Specific symptoms vary depending upon what organ systems are involved. The kidneys, stomach, lungs, heart, skin and central nervous system are commonly affected. Involvement of the kidneys may result in kidney dysfunction and associated symptoms such as low urine production and high blood pressure (hypertension).
Involvement of the lungs (pulmonary system) may result in adult respiratory distress syndrome, a severe lung disorder characterized by difficulties (dyspnea), excessively deep and rapid breathing (hyperventilation) and insufficient levels of oxygen in the circulating blood (hypoxemia). Additional pulmonary symptoms may include (pulmonary embolism).
Blotchy reddish patches of discolored skin, a condition known as livedo reticularis, bruising, and the loss of living tissue (gangrene) may develop.  Central nervous system symptoms may include stroke (cerebral infarction), seizures, and a condition characterized by altered brain structure and function (encephalopathy).
If the heart is involved, symptoms may include inflammation and thickening of the valves of the heart (valvar heart disease) potentially resulting in complication such as mitral valve regurgitation (MVR). In MVR, the mitral valve does not shut properly allowing blood to flow backward into the heart. Affected individuals may also experience chest pain (angina) and the possibility of a heart attack (myocardial infarction).
Additional organ systems may be involved including the gastrointestinal system, resulting in abdominal pain and cramping; the adrenal and pituitary glands resulting in hormone imbalances and low blood pressure; and the bone marrow resulting in low levels of red blood cells (anemia) and platelets (thrombocytopenia).

