Aspergillosis

overview:
Aspergillosis is a fungal infection caused byAspergillus, a species of mold that is found all over the world. More than 180 different types ofAspergillushave been identified and more are continuing to be identified. Most of these molds are harmless. However, some types can cause a variety of diseases in humans ranging from simple allergic reactions to life-threatening invasive disease. Collectively, this group of diseases is referred to as aspergillosis and is broadly broken down into three categories – allergic, chronic and invasive. There are several different forms including allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, allergic Aspergillus sinusitis, invasive aspergillosis, cutaneous (skin) aspergillosis and chronic pulmonary aspergillosis, which also has several different presentations. Aspergillosis rarely develops in healthy individuals; most people breathe in these spores every day without any issues. An infection is much more likely to develop in individuals who have an underlying condition such as asthma, cystic fibrosis and previous lung disease, or who have taken corticosteroid drugs for a long period of time, or in individuals who have a weakened immune system, including people who have low levels of neutrophils, a type of white blood cell that helps the body fight off infection and heal itself (neutropenia), or who are taking drugs that suppress the immune system (immunosuppressive drugs) such as people who have had a bone marrow or organ transplant. In most instances, aspergillosis develops when susceptible individuals breathe in (inhale)Aspergillusspores. Aspergillosis is not contagious and cannot be transmitted from one person to another.

symptoms:
The symptoms of aspergillosis vary depending upon the specific form of the disorder present. The lungs are usually affected. Aspergillosis can present as an allergic reaction, an isolated finding affecting a specific area of the body (e.g., the lungs, sinuses or ear canals), or as an invasive infection that spreads to affect various tissues or organs of the body.
ALLERGIC BRONCHOPULMONARY ASPERGILLOSISThis form of aspergillosis usually occurs in individuals with long-standing asthma or cystic fibrosis but has also been reported in patients with another chronic lung disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It is an allergic reaction to the breathing in (inhalation) of the fungi spores. These spores set off an improper response from an individual’s immune system. Initial symptoms resemble those associated with poorly controlled asthma and usually include chronic wheezing, shortness of breath (dyspnea), and a general feeling of poor health (malaise). Fever can occur but is not common. Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis may also cause chest pain, a cough that brings up blood (hemoptysis) or brown-colored globs (plugs) of mucus and an excess of certain white blood cells in the blood (eosinophilia). The condition usually does not spread to other areas but can cause complications when diagnosis is delayed or it is undertreated including chronic widening (dilation) of the bronchial tubes (bronchiectasis) or severe, persistent asthma and loss of lung function.
A related condition is called severe asthma with fungal sensitization [SAFS]. It is characterized by severe, poorly controlled asthma in the presence of allergy to Aspergillus or other molds, but without fulfilling the criteria for ABPA.
CHRONIC PULMONARY ASPERGILLOSISChronic pulmonary aspergillosis is characterized by scarring (fibrosis) within the lungs and the gradual loss of lung tissue which causes the formation of empty spaces (cavitation, or the widening and growth (expansion) of existing spaces. There is also thickening of the membranes around the lungs (pleural thickening). The term chronic pulmonary aspergillosis describes several distinct patterns of disease, including: aspergilloma, Aspergillus nodule, chronic cavitary pulmonary aspergillosis, chronic fibrosing pulmonary aspergillosis and subacute invasive pulmonary aspergillosis. Chronic pulmonary aspergillosis can recur after treatment.
AspergillomaThe most distinctive form of aspergillosis is the development of a fungal ball known as an aspergilloma. These growths consist of a tangled mass of fungus fibers, mucus, tissue debris, inflammatory cells and blood clotting protein (fibrin). Aspergillomas form in air pockets or cavities found within the lungs that may have been formed from previous lung disease (e.g., tuberculosis or emphysema). Many affected individuals do not have any apparent symptoms (asymptomatic) for years. Symptoms that can develop include wheezing, shortness of breath, chest pain, a chronic cough, fatigue, a cough that brings up blood (hemoptysis) and unintended weight loss. Fever is rare unless individuals also have a bacterial infection. In some instances, hemoptysis can become severe, potentially causing suffocation (asphyxiation). An aspergilloma may remain the same size, can shrink or resolve without treatment. In some cases, an aspergilloma may gradually grow larger and damage nearby lung tissue; if that happens, the condition is called chronic cavitary pulmonary aspergillosis.
Aspergillus NoduleAnAspergillusnodule is a tiny mass of infected tissue. These nodules can form in individuals with fully functioning immune systems (immunocompetent hosts). Affected individuals can develop one nodule or multiple nodules, often without the formation of empty spaces (cavitation). Many individuals do not develop symptoms (asymptomatic), but some individuals will develop a cough, chest infection or worsening (exacerbation) of an existing lung condition such as asthma or chronic pulmonary obstructive disease.
Chronic Cavitary Pulmonary AspergillosisIndividuals with this form of aspergillosis develop cavities or empty spaces within the lungs (cavitation) or experience the widening or growth (expansion) of existing cavities. About half of these individuals have an aspergilloma on x-ray or CT scan. They can experience unintended weight loss, a chronic cough that produces mucus, the coughing up of blood, fatigue and shortness of breath. Less often, fever or night sweats can occur. Rarely, significant and extensive scarring (fibrosis) can occur. This is sometimes referred to as chronic fibrosing pulmonary aspergillosis.
Subacute Invasive Pulmonary Aspergillosis (Chronic Necrotizing Aspergillosis)This form of aspergillosis, also known as semi-invasive aspergillosis, has many similarities with chronic cavitary pulmonary aspergillosis, but progresses more quickly, usually over 1-3 months; the reason is that it affects individuals with some degree of immunosuppression (e.g., people taking high doses of steroids). Patients with more severe immunosuppression (e.g., undergoing chemotherapy or receiving a transplant) usually develop a more acute disease, invasive aspergillosis. Subacute invasive pulmonary aspergillosis shows a chronic, slowly progressive process that, unlike invasive aspergillosis, does not spread to other organ systems or the blood vessels (angioinvasion). In some affected individuals, an aspergilloma (fungal ball) may develop in a cavity created by the destruction of lung tissue by the original infection. General symptoms associated with this form of aspergillosis include fever, night sweats, a cough that brings up sputum, fatigue, a general feeling of poor health (malaise) and unintended weight loss. Affected individuals may also cough up blood or sputum; this can vary from mild to severe.
INVASIVE ASPERGILLOSISInvasive aspergillosis is the most severe form of aspergillosis and usually affects individuals with weakened immune systems or those who have received bone marrow or solid organ transplant. It is characterized by infection that starts in the lungs and then rapidly travels through the bloodstream to affect various organs of the body potentially including the brain, kidneys, heart and skin. The specific symptoms associated with invasive aspergillosis vary based upon the organ system(s) involved. Affected individuals often develop fever, chills, headaches, a cough that brings up blood (mild hemoptysis) or sputum, shortness of breath (dyspnea) and chest pain. Severe life-threatening complications can develop including shock, delirium, massive bleeding from the lungs and inflammation of the trachea and bronchi (tracheobronchitis), which may cause airway obstruction. Organ failure (e.g., liver or kidney) can occur. If the infection spreads to the brain, seizures, intracranial bleeding or inflammation of the membranes surrounding the brain (meningitis) can occur. If the central nervous system is involved, it can present with a stroke.
Invasive aspergillosis has been showed to affect about 10% of patients admitted to intensive care units with severe COVID-19 infection and can be a lethal infection.
Additional Forms of AspergillosisAspergillosis may occur as an isolated infection of individual areas such as the nail beds, eyes, skin, sinuses or ear canals. Infection of the ear canals can cause itchiness, pain and the drainage of fluid from the ears. Aspergillus can cause an allergic reaction or in the sinuses (allergicAspergillussinusitis) may cause a stuffy nose, runny nose, congestion, facial pain and headache. It can also cause invasive disease in the sinuses (invasive Aspergillus sinusitis) which can be more severe and may spread to other areas including the eye or the brain (central nervous system aspergillosis). Aspergillosis of the sinuses is sometimes associated with bone loss of the facial bones. An aspergilloma (fungus ball) may form in the sinuses.
Infection withAspergillusmay cause inflammation of the thin membrane (endocardium) lining the heart, a condition called endocarditis. This condition occurs when heart tissue is directly infected byAspergillusduring cardiac surgery (post-operative aspergillosis). Individuals with aspergillosis affecting the site of surgery have also been reported following eye (ophthalmologic) and dental surgery.
The skin can be affected, sometimes following trauma, through open surgical wounds or injury or if the infection starts somewhere else in the body and spreads to the skin. The gastrointestinal system can also be involved and can cause inflammation of the appendix (appendicitis), abdominal pain, ulcers and bleeding from the gastrointestinal tract.
Aspergillus can also cause an infection within the eye called endophthalmitis. This most often occurs after trauma or surgery to the eye, or by the mold traveling to the eye through the blood during invasive aspergillosis (hematogenous seeding). Endophthalmitis can cause redness and pain in the eye. There may be a white or yellow discharge that comes out of the eye. Vision can be affected as well and there may be an increased sensitivity to bright light (photosensitivity).

