Asphyxiating Thoracic Dystrophy

synonyms:
asphyxiating thoracic dysplasiaATDJeune syndromethoracic-pelvic-phalangeal dystrophyasphyxiating thoracic chondrodystrophychondroectodermal dysplasia-like syndromeinfantile thoracic dystrophyJeune thoracic dystrophy

overview:
Summary
Asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy (ATD) is a very rare form of skeletal dysplasia that primarily affects development of the bone structure of the chest (thorax) resulting in a very narrow and bell-shaped chest. Other major characteristics include kidney problems (due to renal cyst development), shortened bones of the arms and legs, extra fingers and toes, and a shortened stature.
ATD is inherited as an autosomal recessive genetic disorder. It is caused by changes (mutations) in at least 24 different genes that encode for ciliary transport protein:IFT43/52/80/81/122/140/172, WDR19/34/35/60, DYNC2H1, DYNC2LI1, CEP120, NEK1, TTC21B, TCTEX1D2, INTU, TCTN3, EVC 1/2andKIAA0586/0753.
Introduction
ATD is classified as a ciliopathy with major skeletal involvement or ciliary chondrodysplasia. Ciliopathies are conditions caused by mutations in genes involved in making proteins in the finger-like projections on the surface of cells (cilia). Abnormal cilia can lead to problems in the development of cartilage and bone.

symptoms:
ATD is characterized by abnormal development of the rib cage (thorax) resulting in a small thoracic cavity. The characteristic “bell-shaped” chest cavity restricts the growth of the lungs and results in a variable degree of lung hypoplasia and breathing problems (respiratory distress) in the newborn period.
Other clinical features that can be apparent at birth include too many fingers and/or toes (polydactyly), mild to moderate shortening of the long bones of the arms and legs (micromelia), insufficient growth of the pelvic bones, and cardiac defects.
Patients typically present in the newborn period with variable degrees of respiratory distress and recurrent respiratory infections. These breathing problems are the most serious complications of ATD and are the main cause of mortality in these patients. Some reports indicate that 50-60% of children with ATD die in infancy or during the first few years after birth. For those patients that live into early childhood, the breathing problems tend to improve with age such that a subset of patients may live into adolescence or adulthood.
Other complications of ATD can occur as the child grows including: high blood pressure, renal cysts, pancreatic cysts, and, less commonly liver diseases, dental abnormalities, and reduced or deteriorating vision (retinal dystrophy).
Affected individuals may develop chronic nephritis (a kidney condition) that may lead to kidney failure or malfunctions. Heart abnormalities and narrowing of the airway may also occur.

