Ataxia with Vitamin E Deficiency

synonyms:
AVEDFamilial Isolated Vitamin E DeficiencyIsolated Vitamin E DeficiencyFriedreich-like ataxia with vitamin E deficiencyFriedreich-like ataxia

overview:
Summary
Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency (AVED) is a rare progressive neurodegenerative disorder affecting movement and motor control caused by very low vitamin E levels in the blood. Vitamin E is found in food sources and is necessary for proper health, as it acts as an important antioxidant that protects cells in the body from damaging molecules called free radicals. Individuals with AVED are unable to retain and use vitamin E from the diet. AVED can affect many different systems of the body such as the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord), eyes and heart. Without adequate levels of vitamin E, individuals with AVED have neurological issues like trouble coordinating movements (ataxia) and speech (dysarthria), loss of reflexes in the legs (lower limb areflexia) and a loss of sensation in the limbs (peripheral neuropathy). Additionally, an individual with AVED may experience eye abnormalities (retinitis pigmentosa), disorders affecting the heart muscles (cardiomyopathy) and abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis). AVED is very similar to Friedreich’s ataxia, which is a more common disorder. AVED is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern and caused by a changes (mutations or pathogenic variants) in the alpha-tocopherol transfer protein (TTPA) gene.

symptoms:
Individuals usually show symptoms between 5 and 20 years of age. Symptoms and the severity of AVED may be different from person to person. Without treatment, symptoms may get worse as the person grows older.
AVED affects the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system or CNS) as well as the motor and sensory nerves that connect the CNS to the rest of the body (peripheral nervous system). This results in ataxia, which is difficulty controlling body movements and numbness of the hands and feet (peripheral neuropathy). Individuals with AVED develop increasing weakness of the legs, which may appear as an unsteady or staggering way of walking (gait) or trembling when standing still. If symptoms become very severe, an individual with AVED may require a wheelchair if they cannot walk.
Additional symptoms related to the CNS include loss of proprioception, which is an awareness of joint position in relation to other parts of the body. With time, reflexes in the legs may slow down or be absent (areflexia). Involvement of the throat muscles may lead to impaired swallowing or choking and may cause difficulty in eating. Slurred speech or difficulty speaking (dysarthria) may also be present. Some affected individuals may develop a tremor or shaking of the head (titubation). Intellect and emotions are rarely affected.
In addition to neurological symptoms, individuals with AVED may develop symptoms affecting other systems of the body including the eyes. Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a large group of rare eye diseases that cause progressive degeneration of the membrane lining the eyes (retina). This results in visual impairment or decreased vision. Some affected individuals may have yellow “fatty” deposits (xanthelasma) in the retina.
Affected individuals may also develop sideways curvature of the spine (scoliosis), degenerative changes of the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy) or “fatty” deposits (xanthomas) affecting the Achilles tendon around the ankle. Some individuals with AVED may experience a form of dystonia. Dystonia is the name for a group of movement disorders generally characterized by involuntary muscle contractions that force the body into abnormal, sometimes painful, movements and positions (postures).

