Ataxia Telangiectasia

synonyms:
ATcerebello-oculocutaneous telangiectasiaimmunodeficiency with ataxia telangiectasiaLouis-Bar Syndrome

overview:
Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a complex neurodegenerative disorder. Symptoms associated with AT usually present during the preschool years between one and four years of age. An unsteady gait (ataxia) is often the first sign of AT. Symptoms that distinguish AT from other disorders include an impaired ability to coordinate eye movements (oculomotor apraxia) and episodes of involuntary movements (choreoathetosis). Progression of ataxia is associated with cerebellar degeneration, and many school-age children with AT are dependent on wheelchair assistance.
Telangiectasias, which are dilated blood vessels, may be present in the eye, skin or mucous membranes of children with AT. Ocular telangiectasias are the most common type of telangiectasias and usually present between 4 and 6 years of age. Impaired functioning of the immune system (i.e., cellular and humoral immunodeficiency) is present in many people with AT and many affected individuals have an increased risk of developing infections in the sinuses and lungs. People with AT are also at increased risk for certain cancers, particularly lymphomas and leukemias during the first two decades of life and cancers in solid organs during early adulthood.
AT is caused by changes (mutations) in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.

symptoms:
The name ataxia telangiectasia refers to two major symptoms associated with AT. One major symptom is diminished muscle coordination and voluntary muscle control (ataxia). Another is the development of red or purple clusters of dilated blood vessels (telangiectasias) on mucous membranes and the sun-exposed areas of the skin, often visible by age six. The severity of symptoms can vary, but AT usually affects coordination of muscle control and immune and pulmonary responses to infection and stress. The symptoms are discussed below.
Muscle System
Impairment of muscle coordination begins in the head and neck, which can affect swallowing and breathing and lead to drooling and choking. An early and defining symptom of AT is reduced ability to control voluntary eye movements (oculomotor apraxia). Eye movement abnormalities are typically present in most patients. Slurred speech (dysarthria) is another early symptom, often resulting in speech that is monotonous, slow and unstable. Shortly after learning to walk, affected children will begin to stagger and require wheelchair assistance by 10-12 years of age. Most affected individuals exhibit episodes of involuntary movements (choreoathetosis) and tremors. Other common muscle impairment symptoms include involuntary, rapid, rhythmic eye movements (nystagmus), muscle stiffness and contractions and/or shortening and hardening (contractures) of fingers and toes. Muscle impairment also reduces ability to read and write, even though most individuals with AT have normal intelligence. Non-classical forms of AT present with milder symptoms and later onset ataxia.
Immune System
About 60-80% of affected individuals have abnormal functioning of the immune system (immunodeficiencies). Affected individuals have a high risk of infection due to low levels of antibodies (immunoglobulins) including white blood cells (lymphocytes).
Respiratory System
Individuals with AT have an increased risk of sinus and pulmonary infections, including pneumonia and chronic bronchitis. Causes for respiratory symptoms are multifactorial and may include an impaired cough preventing clearance of airway secretions, swallowing abnormalities increasing the risk for aspiration and abnormal immune responses to respiratory infections and stress. Lung (pulmonary) failure is one of the greatest health risks for individuals with AT.
Development
Short height and delayed puberty are common symptoms. Other symptoms include underdeveloped adenoids, tonsils, peripheral lymph nodes and sexual organs. Affected females may experience loss of ovarian function. Affected individuals may also demonstrate premature aging of the hair and skin as teenagers.
Other Health Risks
Individuals with AT are at a high risk of cancer, especially cancer in the lymphatic system (lymphomas) or in the blood (leukemia) as well as abnormal tissue growth (neoplasm).  During the first 20 years, affected individuals have an increased risk of cancers (malignancies) in the blood. Affected young adults are at an increased risk of cancers/tumors in the solid organs (ex. liver, spleen).
People with oneATMgene mutation do not have AT but have a four times higher risk of cancer than the general population, as well as a higher risk for coronary artery disease.
In some people with AT, type II diabetes mellitus may occur. Diabetes mellitus is a condition characterized by insulin resistance (type II) or insufficient secretion of insulin (type I). Primary symptoms may include abnormally increased thirst and urination (polydipsia and polyuria), weight loss, lack of appetite and fatigue. Recent research suggests that diabetes develops during puberty in individuals with AT. Often type II diabetes in people with AT is associated with metabolic syndrome (a constellation of symptoms including type II diabetes, elevated cholesterol and systemic hypertension).
AT is also characterized by cerebellar degeneration, chromosomal instability and sensitivity to radiation. People with AT should minimize exposure to ionizing radiation (i.e., x-rays) due to their sensitivity to radiation.

