ATR-16 Syndrome

synonyms:
alpha-thalassemia-intellectual disability syndrome, chromosome 16-relatedalpha-thalassemia-intellectual disability syndrome, deletion type

overview:
Summary

ATR-16 syndrome is an extremely rare genetic disorder in which affected individuals have a large loss of genetic material (monosomy) on chromosome 16 in which several adjacent genes are lost. Symptoms include intellectual disability, clubfoot, head circumference that is smaller than would be expected based upon an infant’s age and gender (microcephaly), and alpha thalassemia, a blood disorder characterized in this disorder by reduced levels of functional hemoglobin. Hemoglobin, a protein that is found in red blood cells, is responsible for carrying oxygen throughout the body via the blood. Some affected infants have distinctive facial features including eyes that are spaced apart farther than usual (hypertelorism), a broad, prominent bridge of the nose, small ears, and a short neck. ATR-16 syndrome is a contiguous gene syndrome, in which the loss of genetic material on chromosome 16 causes the loss of function of several adjacent genes. ATR-16 syndrome occurs as a spontaneous (de novo) event with no previous family history or in parents with a balanced chromosomal translocation that is inherited in an unbalanced manner.

Introduction

The uncommon combination of alpha thalassemia and intellectual disability was first reported in the medical literature in 1981 by Dr. Weatherall, et al. Since that original description, two distinct syndromes have been defined through additional case reports in the medical literature. One is alpha thalassemia X-linked intellectual disability or ATR-X syndrome. NORD has a separate report on this disorder in the Rare Disease Database. The other is ATR-16 syndrome, the subject of this report.

symptoms:
Researchers have experienced difficulty establishing a clear syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms and much about the disorder is not fully understood. In many cases, there are other chromosomal abnormalities (in addition to the deletion on chromosome 16) and it is difficult to determine what symptoms are associated with what chromosomal abnormality. In addition, the small overall number of identified cases, the lack of large clinical studies, and the possibility of other genes influencing the disorder prevent physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Not surprisingly, the specific symptoms and severity of ATR-16 syndrome can vary greatly from one individual to another. But it is clear that the larger the loss of genetic material from chromosome 16 the more severe the consequences.
Infants with ATR-16 syndrome have alpha thalassemia a form of anemia associated with abnormally small (microcytic) red blood cells which do not contain enough functional hemoglobin. Although anemia from various causes can be associated with symptoms for example fatigue, weakness and shortness of breath, in ATR-16 syndrome the anemia is usually mild, asymptomatic and commonly, an incidental finding.
Alpha thalassemia is caused by mutations in two different genes, theHBA1and theHBA2genes, which are located on the chromosome 16. All individuals have two copies of each of these genes (for a total of four). Infants with ATR-16 syndrome will have a condition called alpha thalassemia minor or trait because the loss of genetic material on chromosome 16 includes one copy of each of these genes. If they receive a mutation in one of these genes on the other chromosome 16, they will develop a form of alpha thalassemia known as hemoglobin H (HbH) disease. Such individuals usually have mild HbH disease. (NORD has a separate report on alpha thalassemia. For more information, choose “alpha thalassemia” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
Intellectual disability, which often ranges from mild to moderate, also occurs in children with ATR-16 syndrome who have loss of at least 1 Mb of genetic material including 55 genes. Developmental and speech delays become apparent as an affected child ages. Less commonly, seizures have been reported. Head circumference may be smaller than would be expected based upon an infant’s age and gender (microcephaly). Growth delays can result in short stature, in which children are shorter than would be expected based upon age and gender.
Infants with ATR-16 syndrome who have larger deletions of genetic material may also have distinctive facial features including eyes that are spaced apart farther than usual (hypertelorism), downward-slanting palpebral fissures (which means the openings between the eyelids slant downward), a broad, prominent bridge of the nose, small ears, receding chin (retrognathia), and a short neck.
Skeletal malformations may occur in some cases including clubfoot (talipes equinovarus) and pinkies that are fixed or “locked” in a bent position. In males certain genital abnormalities may be present such as failure of the testes to descend (cryptorchidism) and the abnormal placement of the urinary opening on the underside of the penis (hypospadias).
In one individual with a deletion of at least 2Mb of genetic information associated with an unbalanced chromosomal translocation, the clinical picture is dominated by more severe intellectual disability, tuberous sclerosis (associated with the loss of the geneTSC2) and polycystic kidney disease (associated with loss of the genePKD1).
Tumor development has been described in two cases with ATR-16; osteosarcoma (bone cancer) was identified one child and a neurocytoma (brain tumor) was identified in a fetus. It is unclear at present whether the tumor development was directly related to the ATR-16.

