Atransferrinemia

synonyms:
congenital atransferrinemiahereditary atransferrinemiahypotransferrinemia

overview:
Atransferrinemia is an extremely rare genetic disorder characterized by low levels of healthy, functional red cells in the blood (hypochromic, microcytic anemia) and by the accumulation of excess iron in the body (hemosiderosis). Symptoms may vary based upon the severity of anemia and upon the extent of iron accumulation in the body and the specific organs affected. Common symptoms include recurrent infections and growth delays. Atransferrinemia is principally caused by mutations of the transferrin (TF) gene and is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. Atransferrinemia is classified as an iron overload disorder. A milder form of atransferrinemia, known as hypotransferrinemia, is caused by mutations in the same gene.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of atransferrinemia vary from one person to another depending upon the specific location and extent of iron accumulation in the body. Some individuals may develop mild symptoms, others may develop serious, life-threatening complications.
Affected individuals often develop severe microcytic hypochromic anemia, a condition characterized by abnormally small red cells (erythrocytes) that are insufficiently filled with hemoglobin. Red cells are blood cells that deliver oxygen throughout the body. Hemoglobin is the iron-rich, oxygen-bearing protein in blood. Microcytic hypochromic anemia may be associated with pallor and fatigue. Some affected individuals may have a slightly enlarged liver (hepatomegaly).
Atransferrinemia is also often associated with growth delays and recurrent infections. Additional symptoms depend upon the location and extent of iron accumulation in the body. Atransferrinemia can potentially affect the liver, heart, joints, pancreas, kidneys and thyroid. Iron accumulation can damage affected organs and can cause scarring (cirrhosis) of the liver, arthritis, an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism) and heart abnormalities. In severe cases, affected individuals can develop life-threatening complications such as pneumonia or an impaired ability to circulate blood to the lungs and the rest of the body, resulting in fluid buildup in the heart, lungs and various body tissues (congestive heart failure).

