Atrioventricular Septal Defect

synonyms:
Atrioventricular Canal DefectsAVSDCommon Atrioventricular Canal (CAVC) DefectEndocardial Cushion Defects

overview:
Atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD) is a general term for a group of rare heart defects that are present at birth (congenital). Infants with AVSDs have improperly developed atrial and ventricular septa and adjoining valves.
The normal heart has four chambers. The two upper chambers, known as atria, are separated from each other by a fibrous partition called the atrial septum. The two lower chambers, known as ventricles, are separated from each other by the ventricular septum. Valves (e.g., mitral and tricuspid) connect the atria (left and right) to their respective ventricles. The valves allow for blood to be pumped through the chambers. Blood travels from the right ventricle through the pulmonary artery to the lungs where it receives oxygen. The blood returns to the heart through pulmonary veins and enters the left ventricle. The left ventricle sends the now oxygen-filled blood into the main artery of the body (aorta). The aorta sends the blood throughout the body.
The parts of the heart described above are formed from an embryonic structure called the endocardial cushions. In individuals with AVSD there is some combination of malformation of these parts of the heart. They may include a hole in the atrial septum, a hole in the ventricular septum, and/or abnormalities of the mitral and triscupid valves. AVSD may be classified as one of three forms: an incomplete (or partial) AVSD (atrial septal defect primum); a transitional form (atrial septal defect and small ventricular septal defect); or a more severe or complete form (large atrial and ventricular defects).
The symptoms of AVSD vary greatly and depend on the severity of the malformations (e.g., valve leakage between ventricles and ventricular size). About half the cases of AVSD occur in children with Down syndrome.

symptoms:
Infants with the complete form of atrioventricular septal defect usually develop a limited ability to circulate blood to the lungs and the rest of the body resulting in fluid buildup in the heart, lung and various body tissues (congestive heart failure). Pulmonary congestion may lead to difficulty breathing (dyspnea) and fatigue. Infants with complete atrioventricular septal defect often have a bluish discoloration of the skin and mucous membranes (cyanosis) due to insufficient oxygen supply to these tissues.
Other symptoms that may occur in all forms of AVSD include poor feeding, abnormally rapid breathing (tachypnea), excessive sweating, and/or an abnormally rapid heartbeat (tachycardia).
Frequent episodes of acute inflammation of the lungs (pneumonia) and bronchial tubes (bronchitis) are common in children with all forms of AVSD. Abnormally high pressure within the artery that leads to the heart from the lungs (pulmonary artery) may impair lung function and result in permanent pulmonary vascular disease before the age of 1 year. Some more severely affected infants may have congestive heart failure as a direct result of these serious complications.
Older children with untreated AVSD may be at risk for brain abscesses, the development of blood clots (thrombosis) that may travel and lodge in the arteries (embolism), and/or acute inflammation of the inner membranes that line the heart (bacterial endocarditis).
Adults with AVSD who have not had surgery to correct this heart defect may develop Eisenmenger syndrome. This is a rare disorder characterized by restricted blood flow between the lungs and the heart that occurs because of a ventricular septal defect. Symptoms of this condition may include abnormally low blood pressure, irregular heartbeats, and/or rapid heart rate. (For more information on this disorder, choose “Eisenmenger” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)

