Atrial Septal Defects

synonyms:
ASDAtrioseptal Defects

overview:
Atrial septal defects (ASDs) are a group of rare disorders of the heart that are present at birth (congenital) and involve a hole in the wall (septum) that separates the two upper-chambers (atria) of the heart.
Normally the heart has four chambers: two upper chambers known as atria that are separated from each other by a fibrous partition known as the atrial septum and two lower chambers known as ventricles that are separated from each other by the ventricular septum. Valves connect the atria (left and right) to their respective ventricles. A small opening between the two atria (foramen ovale) is present at birth. Shortly after birth, the atrial septum gradually grows and seals this opening. In infants with atrial septal defects, the atrial septum may not close properly or may be malformed during fetal development. In these disorders, the opening (called patent foramen ovale) between the atria persists long after it should be closed, resulting in an increase in the workload on the right side of the heart and excessive blood flow to the lungs.
Initially, the symptoms associated with atrial septal defects may be absent or so mild that they may go unnoticed. Frequently this disorder is not recognized until school age or even adulthood. In adults with undetected atrial septal defects, various respiratory problems and/or heart failure may develop.
Several forms of atrial septal defects are recognized. They are classified according to their location in the septum. The term primum refers to defects that are in the lower part of the septum. The term secundum refers to defects that are located in the middle of the septum, and the term sinus venosus refers to defects in the upper part of the septum.

symptoms:
Ostium secundum atrial septal defect is the most common form of this group of heart defects.  The middle portion of the atrial septum in the region of the foramen ovale fails to close during fetal development.  The size of the opening may vary, along with the severity of the symptoms.
Ostium primum atrial septal defect is less common. The lower part of the atrial septum fails to develop normally, leaving an opening between the atria.  Frequently, the valves that separate the atria from their respective ventricles (tricuspid and mitral) are also malformed, and the septum that divides the ventricles may also be deficient or malformed (atrioventricular septal defect).  Another defect may have occurred during embryonic development in the tissue that forms the septum that divides the heart into atria and ventricles (endocardial cushion defect).
Sinus venosus, the least common form of atrial septal defect, occurs when there is an opening on the upper portion of the atrial septum.  This defect is often associated with malformations of the vein that leads from the lungs into the heart (right pulmonary vein).  One of the major veins of the body that returns blood to the heart (superior vena cava) may also be malformed.
Most children with atrial septal defects have no symptoms.  A few affected individuals may be abnormally thin and experience mild growth delays as well as an increased susceptibility to respiratory infections.  Other very severely affected children, especially those with ostium primum defects, may experience breathlessness, easy fatigability with exercise, and/or irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias).
A heart murmur is the most common sign and usually the only sign of ASD in children.  There may also be a change in heart sounds that represents the closing of the valves of the heart.
Around the age of 40 years, people with atrial septal defects may experience symptoms related to an increase in pressure in the blood vessels of the lungs (pulmonary hypertension).  Increased pressure in these vessels causes the blood to be propelled or “shunted” through the abnormal opening in the heart.  Symptoms may include a bluish discoloration of the skin (cyanosis), clubbing of the fingertips, exercise intolerance, and/or an abnormal increase in the number of circulating red blood cells (polycythemia).  Abscesses may also develop in the brain.  Other symptoms may include swelling of the arms and legs and/or difficulty breathing.
Severe cases of atrial septal defects may lead to life-threatening complications such as chest pain, irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias), abnormal enlargement of the heart, a “fluttering” of the heart (atrial fibrillation), and/or heart failure.  Females with atrial septal defects who become pregnant may be at risk for episodes of blood clot formation.  These clots may detach from the walls of the blood vessels and travel through the systemic circulation (embolism).

