Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome

synonyms:
aHUSfamilial hemolytic-uremic syndromehereditary hemolytic-uremic syndrome

overview:
Summary
Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) is an extremely rare disease characterized by low levels of circulating red blood cells due to their destruction (hemolytic anemia), low platelet count (thrombocytopenia) due to their consumption and inability of the kidneys to process waste products from the blood and excrete them into the urine (acute kidney failure), a condition known as uremia. It is a distinctly different illness from the more common disorder known as typical hemolytic uremic syndrome, which is caused byE.coli-producing Shiga toxins (Stx HUS) and is generally foodborne. Most cases of aHUS are genetic, although some may be acquired due to autoantibodies or occur for unknown reasons (idiopathic). aHUS may become chronic, and affected individuals may experience repeated episodes of the disorder. Unlike individuals with typical HUS, who usually recover from the life-threatening initial episode and usually respond well to supportive treatment, individuals with aHUS are much more likely to develop chronic serious complications such as severe high blood pressure (hypertension) and kidney (renal) failure. The signs and symptoms of aHUS result from the formation of tiny blood clots (microthrombi) in various small blood vessels of the body. These clots reduce or prevent proper blood flow to various organs of the body, especially the kidneys. aHUS is a complex disorder and multiple factors, including certain genetic, environmental and immunologic factors, all play a role in its development.
Introduction
The nomenclature and terminology surrounding this disorder can be confusing. aHUS is considered a form of thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA). TMA is broken down into two main forms – thrombotic thrombocytopenia purpura and hemolytic uremic syndrome. Generally, hemolytic uremic syndrome is also broken down into two main forms – aHUS and Stx HUS. More than 90% of individuals with hemolytic uremic syndrome have Stx HUS. aHUS is extremely rare and for many years was used to describe any form that was not Stx HUS. aHUS is now used specifically for instances of the disorder associated with excess activation or dysregulation of the alternate pathway of complement, which is part of the innate immune system. This excludes instances of secondary HUS, in which hemolytic uremic syndrome occurs as a secondary finding of a different disorder or condition. Causes of secondary HUS include malignancy, HIV infection, solid organ transplants, hematopoietic stem cell transplants, autoimmune disorders and the use of certain drugs or medications.

symptoms:
The onset of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome ranges from before birth (prenatally) to adulthood. In young children, the disorder often develops suddenly and usually follows an infection, particularly an upper respiratory infection or gastroenteritis. When it follows an episode of gastroenteritis it can more easily be confused with Stx HUS which almost always is preceded by diarrhea. The disease has different causes and can be unpredictable in how it will progress in one individual as opposed to another.
Many affected individuals present with vague feelings of illness, fatigue, irritability, and lethargy that can potentially lead to hospitalization. The early phases may be difficult to diagnose, and the condition tends to be progressive. Because complications and relapse are common, it is critical that aHUS be recognized at this stage.
The three main findings of aHUS are hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and acute kidney failure. Although most affected individuals develop these three conditions, some individuals will not. Hemolytic anemia is a condition in which there is a premature destruction (hemolysis) of red blood cells. Thrombocytopenia is a condition in which there are low levels of platelets, a blood cell that is involved in clotting.
Kidney disease can be mild or severe. Kidney damage tends to worsen with each subsequent episode. Blood and protein in the urine (hematuria and proteinuria), frequent indicators of kidney disease, are common, especially during acute episodes. Kidney disease is progressive and can potentially progress to cause end stage renal failure, necessitating chronic dialysis or a kidney transplant.
High blood pressure (hypertension) is common and can result from kidney disease or because of lack of blood flow (ischemia) due to the formation small blood clots (microthrombi). Hypertension can be severe and may be associated with headaches and seizures.
Because small blood clots can potentially form in blood vessels serving other organs of the body, organ damage and failure can occur elsewhere besides the kidneys (which is the organ that is most commonly affected). The brain, gastrointestinal tract, liver, lungs, and heart can also be affected. Specific symptoms can vary based upon the specific organ system involved. Cardiovascular complications can include disease of the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy) or heart attack (myocardial infarction). Neurological complications can include headaches, double vision (diplopia), irritability, drowsiness, facial paralysis, seizures, transient ischemic attacks, stroke, and coma. Gastrointestinal bleeding may also occur. The lungs can be affected and bleeding or fluid accumulation in the lungs (pulmonary edema) can occur.

