Auditory Neuropathy Spectrum Disorder

synonyms:
auditory de-synchronyauditory neuropathy (AN)auditory dyssynchronyANSDauditory mismatch

overview:
Summary
Auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder (ANSD) is a newly described condition defined as a sensorineural hearing loss that affects a person’s ability to hear or understand speech. Sensorineural means that this disorder is due to a lesion or defect in the inner ear, auditory nerve or the connection between the nerve and brain. As a result, sound enters through the ear but doesn’t get adequately transmitted to the brain. The hearing loss varies from normal to severe while speech is generally perceived as distorted and hard to understand. ANSD is characterized by an abnormal speech perception that does not necessarily correlate with the patient’s hearing abilities. It is a disease that primarily affects children. Most people are affected from birth and are diagnosed early on in life. However, some adults may be affected but are undiagnosed. The general population incidence varies between study reports, but approximatively 1 to 3 children per 10,000 births are affected by ANSD. With a proper follow-up, medical devices and therapies, a child with ANSD can develop good language, communication and hearing skills.
Introduction
The term “auditory neuropathy” was first proposed by Arnold Starr, MD and colleagues in 1996 as hearing impairments due to a defect in the eighth cranial nerve (or auditory nerve that allows us to hear). This definition was later expanded to include loss of inner hair cells in the ear or damage between the nerve and brain. According to the affected site in that pathway, a patient can have a presentation ranging from mild hearing loss to functionally deaf. This is why this disorder has been subsequently renamed “auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder”. Hearing ability and speech perception may vary. When a child is suspected of having hearing problems, a proper diagnosis and early intervention are crucial for a better outcome.

symptoms:
If you are a parent and notice any or all of the following, it’s essential to consult a doctor.
In the presence of loud noises, your child doesn’t turn around.By eight months, your baby is not laughing, babbling or cooing.By twelve months, your baby does not try to reproduce surrounding sounds and actions.
If a hearing problem is suspected, you will be referred to an audiologist, a healthcare professional who can diagnose and treat hearing loss or an otolaryngologist (ENT = ear, nose and throat doctor).
If you are an adult and notice that you cannot hear well on the phone and have difficulty understanding speech, it’s important to talk about this with your general practitioner.
Symptoms of auditory neuropathy may present in various ways, depending on the affected site in the auditory pathway. They can also fluctuate day to day. For some patients, symptoms may improve with time, and for others, they might stay the same or get worse. A patient can present with one or more of the following:
Mild to severe hearing lossDifficulty understanding spoken wordsNormal hearing abilities with impaired speech perception (understanding speech)Difficulty understanding speech especially in noisy environmentsDifficulty determining where a sound is coming from
Newborn hearing screening protocols are not the same everywhere. Thus, sometimes ANSD is not detected in the early stages and symptoms can only be noticed over time. In children, speech may develop naturally or be delayed. Speech discrimination can range from no difficulty distinguishing sounds to difficulty discriminating sounds in a quiet environment. When a child is followed over time, spontaneous improvement is possible clinically by 12 months, and stabilization may happen around 18 months. However, improvement depends on the severity of the impairments, the underlying cause and the treatment’s efficacy.

