Autosomal Dominant Tubulo-Interstitial Kidney Disease

synonyms:
uromodulin kidney disease (UKD)mucin-1 kidney disease (MKD)familial juvenile hyperuricemic nephropathymedullary cystic kidney diseaserenin associated kidney diseaseuromodulin associated kidney diseasemedullary cystic kidney disease type 1medullary cystic kidney disease type 2ADTKD

overview:
Autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease (ADTKD) describes a group of diseases that affect the tubules of the kidney. These conditions have the following characteristics:  They are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner; this means that a parent has a 50% chance of passing the disease on to their children. Often many family members are affected. (2) Chronic kidney disease develops. This initially is noticed as an elevated blood creatinine level. There are no symptoms from an elevated creatinine until it is very high, so often the elevated creatinine is found out on blood testing at a doctor’s office or in the hospital. Often, doctors are uncertain why the creatinine is elevated. As chronic kidney disease progresses, and the creatinine rises more, patients develop symptoms of fatigue, anemia, and feel cold all the time. Decreased appetite and fluid retention develop as the patient nears the need for dialysis. (3) Dialysis or kidney transplant is required sometime between the 4th and 7th decade of life. (4) Several types of the disease are associated with elevated uric acid concentrations in blood and gout, which sometimes starts in the teenage years. In ADTKD-UMOD and ADTKD- REN, some – but not all – family members are affected by gout.
ADTKD-UMOD (also known as uromodulin kidney disease) is the most common form of this condition. It is caused by a mutation in a gene producing a protein called uromodulin. This protein is only made in the kidney. The mutation causes affected individuals to develop gout, frequently in their teenage years, and progressive kidney disease. This particular condition has previously been called familial juvenile hyperuricemic nephropathy type1 or medullary cystic kidney disease type 2. Preferred terms at present include ADTKD-UMOD and uromodulin kidney disease (UKD).
ADTKD-REN is caused by mutations in the gene producing a protein called renin. There are several types of this disorder.  Children can present as early as infancy with elevated blood potassium levels, low blood bicarbonate levels, decreased kidney function, and anemia.  Some individuals present later in childhood with anemia and decreased kidney function.  Often, their blood potassium levels are mildly elevated, and their blood uric acid levels are also elevated. These individuals also suffer from gout.  Some families with this disorder may have a less severe mutation and may present in their early twenties with gout and later develop chronic kidney disease. This condition has previously been called familial juvenile hyperuricemic nephropathy type 2.
ADTKD-MUC1 (MUC1 kidney disease) is due to mutations in the gene producing the protein mucin-1. Patients with this type of autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease have slowly progressive chronic kidney disease. They do not have any symptoms when they are young, but as they get older, their kidney function declines. Mildly decreased kidney function may first be noted in the late teens/early twenties, and affected individuals usually require dialysis or a kidney transplant between the 3rd and seventh decades of life. Unlike the other types of the disease (uromodulin kidney disease or disease due to renin mutations), patients with MUC1 mutations do not have frequent gout, anemia or other symptoms.
Autosomal dominant tubulotubulointerstitial kidney disease of unknown genetic cause is the term used to describe families with this disease in whom the cause is not known. These individuals usually have chronic kidney disease but do not have gout. Researchers are now trying to find the cause of this disease.  Some of these families have mutations in the MUC1 gene that have not yet been identified and are difficult to find.

symptoms:
All individuals with ADTKD show slow loss of kidney function that may be present as early as childhood. Patients may first be diagnosed with this disease when they are found to have an elevated blood creatinine level (measure of kidney function) on a routine blood test at their doctor’s office. For many individuals, there may be no other symptoms. Doctors will check the urine, and will find that it does not contain blood and little or no protein. A kidney ultrasound is usually normal, and even a kidney biopsy may not point to a cause for this condition. Doctors are often confused because the patient has an elevated creatinine but the urine tests and the kidney ultrasound look normal. Thus, ADTKD is frequently not properly diagnosed. The kidney disease progresses slowly, and patients eventually develop symptoms of kidney failure (nausea, fluid retention) and require dialysis or kidney transplant. The age that kidney transplant or dialysis is required is highly variable, with some individuals requiring it as early as age 17, while other family members may not even require it at age 70. The reason for this variation is unclear.
Individuals with ADTKD-MUC1 only have symptoms of chronic kidney disease progression and do not suffer from other distinctive symptoms, making this form of the disease even more difficult to diagnose.
In addition to chronic kidney disease, patients with ADTKD-UMOD have elevated levels of blood uric acid that can lead to gout. Gout is a form of arthritis (joint inflammation) that commonly affects the big toe, knee, elbow, or other joints. Gout is usually a disease of middle-aged men. Therefore, gout may be misdiagnosed in teenagers with this condition. When gout is diagnosed, doctors frequently are unsure why the gout is present. While many families with ADTKD-UMOD have gout, it is not present in all families.
In addition to high uric acid levels, gout, and chronic kidney disease, Individuals with ADTKD-REN all suffer from anemia early in life, being present as early as one year of age. Anemia usually resolves during adolescence but returns when kidney failure worsens (usually in the 30’s or 40’s). Often, the cause of the anemia is not known when diagnosed. Patients also tend to have low blood pressures and high blood potassium levels. Some, but not all, affected individuals produce more than normal amounts of urine, which can result in bed-wetting in childhood.
Individuals with autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease of unknown genetic cause are similar to those with disease due to MUC1 mutations, in that the only symptom is slowly progressive kidney disease.

