Autoimmune Hepatitis

synonyms:
AIHautoimmune chronic active hepatitislupoid hepatitis

overview:
Summary
Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is a non-contagious, chronic, inflammatory, autoimmune disease in which one’s own immune system attacks healthy, normal liver cells. The cause of liver cell destruction in this disease is unclear, but may be related to an imbalance in some of the immune system cells (effector and regulatory). The persistent inflammation within the liver observed in AIH can result in scarring, ultimately leading to cirrhosis, liver failure requiring a liver transplant, and even death. AIH is about 4 times more common in females than males and is commonly associated with other autoimmune conditions including type 1 diabetes, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, and celiac disease. In fact, 25-50% of AIH patients will develop another concurrent autoimmune disease in their lifetime.
There are two clinically relevant types of AIH, including type 1and type 2. Type 1 AIH, also referred to as the classic type, is typically diagnosed in adulthood, whereas type 2 is diagnosed during childhood. Both types are treated similarly; however, type 2 AIH can be more severe and more difficult to control. Symptoms associated with AIH include fatigue, itching (pruritus), yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice), nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, weight loss, light colored stools, dark colored urine, joint pain, rashes, and loss of menstruation in women. AIH is commonly diagnosed via a combination of the patient’s symptoms, blood work, and a liver biopsy. Although there is no cure for AIH, it can often be controlled with medication including steroids and other agents which suppress the immune system. Those with AIH often follow with either a gastroenterologist or hepatologist to manage their condition.
Introduction
In the 1950’s, an internal medicine doctor named Dr. Waldenström, first described this condition after observing a cohort of young women with elevated liver tests and an elevated component of the immune system called gamma globulin. This was eventually termed “lupoid hepatitis” by Dr. Mackay until the 1960s when the name was changed to autoimmune hepatitis. AIH was the first chronic liver disease to have a dedicated treatment. In the 1960s-1970s, therapy with glucocorticoids and azathioprine revealed successful disease control for many. Since these sentinel observations, there has been limited advancement in novel drug therapies. Early detection of AIH is key, as early and effective treatment is associated with better patient outcomes.

symptoms:
Symptoms can vary from person to person with AIH; some may not even have any symptoms. Common initial symptoms can include fatigue, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, weight loss, light colored stools, dark colored urine, joint pain, rashes, and loss of menstruation in women. Some may develop an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly) and/or spleen (splenomegaly).
Without adequate therapy, there is risk of disease progression in the form of liver fibrosis. With time, one may develop liver scaring (cirrhosis) that can increase risk of liver failure, development of fluid in the abdomen (ascites), gastrointestinal bleeding from abnormal blood flow in the esophagus and stomach, confusion associated with a poorly functioning liver, and even liver cancer.

