Autoimmune Polyglandular Syndrome Type 1

synonyms:
APS-1APS type 1autoimmune-polyendocrine-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy syndromeautoimmune polyendocrinopathy type 1 (APECED)polyglandular autoimmune (PGA) syndrome type 1

overview:
Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 (APS-1) is a rare and complex recessively inherited disorder of immune-cell dysfunction with multiple autoimmunities. It presents as a group of symptoms including potentially life-threatening endocrine gland and gastrointestinal dysfunctions. Autoimmune disorders occur when antibodies and immune cells are launched by the body against one or several antigens of its own tissues. APS-1 is caused by changes (mutations) in the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene. HLA-DR/DQ genes also play a role in predisposing to which of the component autoimmune disease the patient actually develops.
APS-1 needs to be distinguished from the unrelated but more common APS-2 which is characterized by type-1 diabetes and autoimmune thyroid diseases.

symptoms:
While the symptoms of APS-1 are variable in each patient, they often will have components of at least two of the three major conditions that result from this syndrome: chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism, and adrenocortical insufficiency.
Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC), a condition of recurrent candidiasis infections that may involve the skin, nails, oral, anal and genital mucosa, is a hallmark of APS-1. It is often the first manifestation of APS-1, typically appearing and recurring frequently within the first two years of life. The CMC of APS-1 generally presents in babies as thrush (oral candidiasis), diaper rash, and/or nail involvement. (For further information on CMC, please see ‘Related Disorders’ section of this report.)
The term ectodermal dystrophy refers to the particular abnormalities of the nails, dental enamel (enamel hypoplasia of permanent teeth), hair (alopecia), corneas (keratopathy) and skin (vitiligo–areas of depigmention of the skin) that may be seen in patients with APS-1. These findings are not all necessarily present in every patient with APS-1. However, alopecia and vitiligo are caused by specific autoimmunities, while nail deformities result from chronic candidiasis. The cause of dental enamel hypoplasia in APS-1 has not yet been determined.
Metaphyseal dysplasia, a bone disorder in which the ends (metaphyses) of the bones are abnormally broad, has also recently been described in the legs in people with APS-1.
Patients with APS-1 have a defect of the immune system involving a particular subset of T-cells called Treg (T-regulatory) cells. It is suggested that this Treg-cell defect leads to the wide spread loss of immune tolerance, causing the autoimmunities in the disease. However, a specific defect in immunity to candidiasis indicates the presence of an immune effector defect also. Possibly, the invariable presence of auto-antibodies to the interferon family of immunological molecules called cytokines may prove to be the underlying reason.
The first endocrine gland dysfunction to occur in APS-1 is usually hypoparathyroidism (under functioning of the parathyroid glands). More than 75% of patients develop hypoparathyroidism, usually before age 10-years. Dysfunction of the parathyroid glands leads to below-normal level of serum calcium together with elevated phosphorus levels. In turn, this can lead to a host of clinical findings, including muscle cramping and spasms, rigidity (tetany) and even seizures. (For further information on hypoparathyroidism, see Related Disorders Section of this report.)
Adrenocortical insufficiency (Addison’s disease) is typically the second endocrine disorder to appear in APS-1. Adrenocortical insufficiency is characterized by chronic and insufficient functioning of the cortex (outer layer) of the adrenal gland. This malfunction results in a deficiency of the glucocorticoid and salt retaining hormones cortisol and aldosterone respectively. Deficiencies of these hormones may lead to weakness, muscle cramps, faintness, diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, low blood pressure, dehydration, and salt craving. These side-effects can become pronounced and life-threatening if not correctly identified and treated. However, steroid replacement therapy can precipitate or worsen hypocalcemia when hypoparathyroidism has not been already identified. (For further information on adrenocortical insufficiency, see Related Disorders Section of this report.)
Patients with APS-1 can also develop many other autoimmune disorders, including autoimmune liver disease (chronic active hepatitis), ovarian failure (hypogonadism), early onset pernicious anemia from atrophic gastritis, and a variety of gastrointestinal problems resulting in chronic malabsorption and diarrhea. Insulin-dependent diabetes may also occur, albeit more often in Scandinavian patients than is seen in the US.

