Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease

synonyms:
ADPKD

overview:
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a genetic disorder characterized by the formation of cysts within the kidneys. Symptoms caused by cyst formation in the kidneys include high blood pressure (hypertension), pain on the sides of the body between the last rib and the hip (flank pain), blood in the urine (hematuria) and progressively poor function of the kidneys (kidney insufficiency).   In most patients, ADPKD eventually progresses to cause end stage renal disease, requiring renal replacement therapy, either dialysis or renal transplantation. ADPKD is not simply a kidney disorder and other organ systems of the body can potentially be affected (multisystem disorder) by the development of cysts. The specific symptoms present in each person depend upon the specific organ systems involved. The liver, pancreas, a membrane covering the spinal cord and brain (arachnoid membrane), the prostate, and the glands of the male reproductive tract that produce fluid that is part of semen (seminal vesicles) may become involved. Abnormalities affecting the heart and blood vessels (cardiovascular system) may also occur in individuals with ADPKD. ADPKD usually does not become apparent until the fourth or fifth decade and was once known as “adult” polycystic kidney disease. However, it has been reported in children and infants. ADPKD is caused by mutations of one of two genes that create certain proteins essential for the proper health of the kidneys and other parts of the body. Approximately 85 % have ADPKD1, the most aggressive form of the disease; those with ADPKD2 progress to kidney insufficiency about 20 years later.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms and their severity can vary greatly from one person to another, even among members of the same family. Most affected individuals develop symptoms between the third and fifth decades of life. However, symptoms may occur during childhood or even in infancy. Some affected individuals never develop obvious symptoms (asymptomatic) and may be diagnosed with ADPKD incidentally in the eighth or ninth decade of life. ADPKD is a highly variable, multisystem disorder; it is important to note that affected individuals will not have all of the symptoms discussed below.
KIDNEY (RENAL) DISEASEThe characteristic finding of ADPKD is the development of fluid-filled sacs (cysts) in the kidneys. All individuals with ADPKD develop cysts in the kidneys, but the number, size, progression and severity of cyst development varies greatly from one person to another. In most cases, renal cysts continue to grow and multiply, potentially causing a variety of symptoms including abnormal enlargement of the kidneys, high blood pressure (hypertension), flank pain, hematuria, poor function of the kidneys (renal insufficiency) and, potentially, kidney failure.
Hypertension affects approximately 50 percent of individuals aged 20-34 most of whom have normal kidney function. In some cases, hypertension may be the first symptom noted. Hypertension usually occurs long before the development of renal failure. Nearly all individuals who develop renal failure have hypertension.
Pain is the most commonly reported symptom of ADPKD. Pain may be described as a sense or feeling of fullness or chronic pain affecting the “flank,” the area of the body between the last rib and the hip (i.e., where the kidneys are located). In some cases, pain may be severe (acute) due to bleeding (hemorrhaging) complications, the passage of kidney stones or chronic urinary tract infection.
Eventually, affected individuals may develop renal insufficiency, which refers to the impaired ability of the kidneys to perform their basic functions. The kidneys are two bean-shaped organs located under the ribcage. The kidneys have several functions including filtering and excreting waste products from the blood and body, creating certain hormones, and helping maintain the balance of certain chemicals in the body such as potassium, sodium, chloride calcium and other electrolytes. Damage to the kidneys in ADPKD may be slowly progressive and can cause a variety of symptoms including weakness and fatigue, changes in appetite, puffiness or swelling, back pain, poor digestion, nausea and vomiting and nocturia (night-time urination) (due to decreased urinary concentration).
The progression to end stage renal disease is slowly progressive in most cases. End stage renal disease is when the kidneys can no longer function properly; they will not be able to filter waste products, regulate hormones or electrolytes, or concentrate urine sufficiently to maintain life. Approximately 50 percent of individuals with the ADPKD1 type develop end stage renal disease by 53 years of age. Those with the ADPKD2 type develop kidney failure about 20 years later.. A wide variety of symptoms may be associated with end stage renal disease including fatigue, weakness, weight loss, difficulty breathing, nausea, vomiting, and cognitive problems such as difficulties concentrating or thinking clearly.
Additional symptoms that can occur in individuals with ADPKD include blood in the urine (hematuria), abdominal or lower back pain, the development of kidney stones (nephrolithiasis), chronic urinary traction infections, and cyst infections. Hematuria affects approximately 40 percent of individuals. Significant (gross) hematuria before the age of 30 is associated with an increased risk of progression of kidney disease. Kidney stones affect approximately 20 percent of individuals with ADPKD. Cyst infections are associated with fever and back or abdominal pain.
EXTRARENAL DISEASEIndividuals with ADPKD may have symptoms caused by problems outside the kidneys (extrarenal disease). For example, affected individuals may develop cysts in other organs of the body especially the liver (polycystic liver disease). The frequency of polycystic liver disease increases with age affecting more than 90 % of patients with ADPKD1 or ADPKD2. Liver cysts usually develop much later in life and progress much slower than kidney cysts. Women tend to have more liver cysts and larger livers than men. In most cases polycystic liver disease does not cause symptoms. Symptoms that can occur include enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly), pain in the lower portion of the back, an abnormal early feeling of fullness (early satiety), shortness of breath especially upon exertion (dyspnea), and backflow of the contents of the stomach into the esophagus (gastroesophageal reflux). Yellowing of the eyes and the skin (jaundice) occur rarely if cysts block the bile ducts.
Other organs that may be affected by the formation of cysts include the pancreas, arachnoid membrane (a layer of tissue in the brain), and the glands of the male reproductive tract that produce fluid that is part of semen (seminal vesicles). Cysts affecting the pancreas usually do not cause symptoms except in rare cases in which inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis) occurs. Cysts affecting the arachnoid membrane usually do not cause symptoms, but may increase the risk of developing a collection of blood between the outer and middle layers of the covering (meninges) of the brain (subdural hematoma). Cysts affecting the seminal vesicles can potentially cause infertility.
ADPKD can also potentially affect the heart and blood vessels (cardiovascular system). Involvement of the valves of the heart can cause mitral valve prolapse. The mitral valve is located between the left upper and left lower chambers (left atrium and left ventricle) of the heart. Mitral valve prolapse occurs when one or both of the flaps (cusps) of the mitral valve bulge or collapse backward (prolapse) into the left upper chamber (atrium) of the heart. In some cases, this may allow leakage or the backward flow of blood from the left lower chamber of the heart (ventricle) back into the left atrium (mitral regurgitation). In some cases, no associated symptoms are apparent (asymptomatic). However, in other cases, mitral valve prolapse can result in chest pain, abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias), fatigue, dizziness, and/or other symptoms and signs.
Some individuals with ADPKD may develop a thickening of the walls the heart, especially within the left ventricle (ventricular hypertrophy). The left ventricle is the lower left chamber of the heart through which oxygenated blood passes into the main artery of the body (aorta). Left ventricular hypertrophy can obstruct the flow of blood from the heart and can be associated with a variety of symptoms.
Some affected individuals may develop widening (dilatation) of the part of the aorta (the main artery of the body) that is attached to the heart (aortic root). Aortic root dilatation can cause aortic insufficiency, in which the valves of the aorta weaken or balloon allowing blood to flow backward into the left ventricle. This can cause a rising pulse rate, chest pain, fatigue, palpitations, shortness of breath and fainting. In rare cases, some individuals with ADPKD have developed an aortic dissection, a life-threatening condition in which there is a tear within the middle layer of the wall of the aorta. This tear causes the middle layer to separate (dissect) from the inner layer.
Another potentially serious complication of ADPKD is the development of weak areas in the walls of the blood vessels of the brain (intracranial aneurysm). Intracranial aneurysms can cause paralysis (palsy) of certain cranial nerves and seizures due to compression of nearby brain structures. If aneurysms rupture they can cause life-threatening bleeding complications. Intracranial aneurysms tend to cluster within families; they occur in approximately 16 percent of individuals with ADPKD with a positive family history of aneurysms. Intracranial aneurysms occur in approximately 6 percent of individuals with ADPKD with a negative family history of aneurysms.
Patients frequently have weaknesses in the abdominal wall near the midline (ventral hernia), in the wall of the abdomen near the bellybutton (umbilical hernia) or protrusion of part of the intestines through a tear in the wall of the lower abdomen (inguinal hernia).
Some individuals with ADPKD may develop out-pouches diverticula on the walls of the large intestines (colon). Inflammation within these may cause abdominal pain, changes in bowel movements (e.g., diarrhea or constipation) and bleeding from part of the large intestines via the rectum.

