Autoinflammation with Infantile Enterocolitis

synonyms:
AIFEC

overview:
Autoinflammation with infantile enterocolitis (AIFEC) is a newly identified and extremely rare inflammatory disorder that manifests early in infancy and affects patients throughout adulthood. AIFEC is caused by a change (mutation) in theNLRC4gene, resulting in increased inflammation and damage to healthy tissues (autoinflammation). Patients withNLRC4mutations present with enterocolitis (inflammation of the digestive tract causing diarrhea) in infancy and flares of severe and sometimes life-threatening autoinflammation throughout life. Macrophage activation syndrome (MAS), the type of autoinflammation seen in AIFEC, causes fevers, enlarged spleen, blood disturbances, and can progress to organ damage and death if not treated.

symptoms:
AIFEC is characterized by a variety of symptoms related to the activation of inflammatory processes. The overactivation of the patient’s immune system is destructive to the patient’s healthy tissues and may be life-threatening. Symptoms often occur in flares alternating with largely symptom-free periods. The exact cause of the flares is not completely understood, but may be linked to emotional stress, physical stress, and/or stresses on the immune system such as viral or bacterial infections.
Though fever and flu-like symptoms are the most common symptoms in AIFEC patients, many patients also develop enterocolitis, or inflammation of the digestive tract. This enterocolitis can range in severity from mild to life-threatening in AIFEC patients. It usually causes a severe watery diarrhea, and may also cause vomiting. This diarrhea usually occurs only in infancy and resolves after the child is about 1-year-old. Patients with severe diarrhea may need extra nutrition in the hospital in the form of fluid provided into a vein (total parenteral nutrition, TPN). The other inflammatory symptoms usually persist into adulthood.
The type of autoinflammation seen in AIFEC is sometimes called macrophage activation syndrome (but MAS is not only found in AIFEC) because one kind of immune cells, macrophages, appear to be particularly overactivated. MAS can cause fever, fast heart rate, decreased numbers of cells in the blood, clotting problems, increased fats in the blood, changes in iron handling, large spleen, and other blood abnormalities that indicate inflammation. Less commonly, organ-specific symptoms can include spotted, bumpy, and/or itchy rashes, loss of consciousness, seizures, breathing problems, and liver dysfunction. Without treatment, symptoms may progress to severe blood clotting problems (DIC), organ failure, and death. Muscle pain, joint pain, anemia (decreased ability for the blood to carry oxygen), and short height have also been observed in adults with AIFEC.

