Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome

synonyms:
Rieger syndromeiridogoniodysgenesis with somatic anomaliesRieger anomalyAxenfeld syndromeAxenfeld anomaly

overview:
Summary
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) is a rare genetic disorder that affects the eye as well as other parts of the body. It is estimated to occur in approximately 1 person in 50,000 worldwide. The disorder affects males and females equally and has been observed in patients from various ethnic backgrounds from all over the world.
Signs and symptoms of ARS can be divided into ocular and non-ocular (systemic). Ocular features include, among others, an underdeveloped iris (iris hypoplasia), displacement of the pupil of the eye so that it is not centered (corectopia), full thickness tears in the iris of the eyes, an opaque ring around the outer edge of the cornea (posterior embryotoxon) and very rarely a small cornea (microcornea). Non-ocular features include, among others, dental and craniofacial abnormalities, hearing loss, excessive skin around the navel and very rarely a smaller than usual anal opening (refer to the ‘Signs & Symptoms’ section of this report for more information).
ARS is the result of abnormal embryonic development, so the condition is usually diagnosed during infancy or childhood. A serious consequence of ARS is glaucoma, which usually develops later in childhood or adulthood. Glaucoma is often due to increased fluid pressure within the eyeball and can lead to complete permanent blindness if left untreated. Thus, the main course of treatment is the effective management of glaucoma, medically or surgically (if medications are not effective).
Introduction
The Axenfeld anomaly is defined as eye peripheral anterior segment defects and was first described in 1920 by the German ophthalmologist Theodor Axenfeld. Later in 1934, Rieger described the Rieger anomaly as central changes in the iris of the eye along with features mentioned in Axenfeld anomaly.
Axenfeld syndrome and Rieger syndrome are defined as Axenfeld anomaly and Rieger anomaly accompanied by systemic effects, respectively. Distinction between these four conditions was difficult and clinically irrelevant due to the overlap of clinical features between them as well as the involvement of the same gene changes (mutations). Thus, they are now all grouped under the same condition referred to as Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.

symptoms:
Ocular signs and symptoms
Ocular features of ARS usually occur in both eyes. The main ocular signs include an underdeveloped iris (iris hypoplasia), displacement of the pupil of the eye so that it is not centered (corectopia), one or more full thickness tears in the iris of the eye and an opaque ring around the outer edge of the cornea (posterior embryotoxon). Other features include adhesions in the front of the eye, between the iris and the edge of the cornea.
Glaucoma is a group of diseases in which the eye’s optic nerve is damaged. This damage is often secondary to increased pressure within the eyeball. Glaucoma is seen in approximately 50% of patients with ARS and can lead to complete permanent blindness if not treated. Fluid in the eye normally drains out of the eye through the angle formed by the junction of the iris and the cornea. Defects in the formation of the angle of the eye and/or adhesions that block this drainage route that are associated with ARS can lead to glaucoma.
Systemic signs and symptoms
Systemic signs include dental abnormalities including a congenital condition in which fewer teeth than normal are present (hypodontia), a tooth or teeth that are smaller than normal (microdontia), six or more missing teeth (oligodontia), complete absence of teeth (anodontia) and/or cone-shaped teeth.
Other characteristics include craniofacial abnormalities resulting in a prominent forehead, face that appears to be flattened, widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), broad flat bridge of the nose, under-developed bones of the upper jaw, thin upper lip and/or a protruding lower lip.
Some patients with ARS may also present with failure of the skin around the navel to decrease in size after birth (a condition that is sometimes mistaken for an umbilical hernia) and very rarely an unusually small anal opening (anal stenosis). Rarely, a patient may in fact present with umbilical hernia — a protrusion of intestine through a weakness in the abdominal wall around the navel.
Other rare manifestations include a congenital abnormality in which the urethra in males opens from a different location than its usual one on the head of the penis (hypospadias), abnormalities of the pituitary gland — an important hormone-producing gland found in the brain, arachnoid cysts — fluid-filled balloons under one of the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord, growth delay, heart defects and hearing abnormalities.

