Bachmann-Bupp Syndrome

synonyms:
ODC1 gain-of-function-related neurodevelopmental disorderneurodevelopmental disorder with alopecia and brain abnormalities; NEDABABABS

overview:
Bachmann-Bupp syndrome (BABS) is a rare genetic disorder caused by gain-of-function changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in theODC1gene. Affected individuals have a distinctive type of hair loss (alopecia), global developmental delay, low muscle tone (hypotonia), nonspecific abnormal physical characteristics (dysmorphic features) and behavioral abnormalities. There is no cure for the disorder, but research is underway to better understand and treat this disease. Current treatment is aimed at the specific symptoms present in each individual.

symptoms:
There are 9 patients reported in the medical literature with BABS. From their histories, pathogenic variants in theODC1gene are thought to be responsible for the following:
Alopecia – hair is typically present at birth but is sometimes sparse and atypical in color; hair loss in clumps begins in the first few weeks of life; there is typically congenital absence or sparseness of eyebrows and eyelashes; some individuals regrow scalp hair that usually remains sparse.Dysmorphic features have been identified in most affected individuals but not with any specific pattern or consistency.Moderate to severe global developmental delay – walking was achieved between ages 17 months and 4 years and first words were said between ages 3 and 6 years. Some individuals have not yet achieved these milestones at the time of this report.HypotoniaBehavior concerns – attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, autism spectrum and aggression have all been reported.Skin findings – Dry, rough patches and bumps on skin (keratosis pilaris), recurrent follicular cysts and dry skin have been reported.Feeding concerns and constipation.Large head (macrocephaly) and nonspecific brain MRI findings.Too much amniotic fluid during pregnancy (prenatal polyhydramnios).
Other findings reported have been quite variable. One patient has been reported with a history of seizures starting at 14 years of age. One individual has been reported with congenital sensorineural hearing loss in one ear. Two individuals with congenital heart disease – one with mild pulmonary stenosis and the other with self-resolved ventricular septal defect – have been reported. Two individuals with brittle nails and one with underdeveloped (hypoplastic) toenails have been reported. One individual with an inward turned eye (esotropia), eyes that appear to be misaligned (pseudostrabismus) and a vision abnormality related to an overly curved cornea (myopic astigmatism) has been reported.
Due to the small number of identified cases, the young age of reported patients and recent discovery of the condition, there is much yet to learn about the natural history of the disease.

