Banti’s Syndrome

synonyms:
Banti's DiseaseHypersplenismIdiopathic congestive splenomegalyIdiopathic portal hypertension

overview:
Banti syndrome is a disorder of the spleen, the large, gland-like organ in the upper left side of the abdomen that produces red blood cells before birth and, in newborns, removes and destroys aged red blood cells, and plays a role in fighting infection. In the case of Banti syndrome, the spleen rapidly but prematurely destroys blood cells.
This syndrome is characterized by abnormal enlargement of the spleen (splenomegaly) due to obstruction of blood flow in some veins and abnormally increased blood pressure (hypertension) within the veins of the liver (e.g., hepatic or portal veins), or the spleen (splenic veins). The disorder may be due to any number of different factors causing obstruction of portal, hepatic, or splenic veins including abnormalities present at birth (congenital) of such veins, blood clots, or various underlying disorders causing inflammation and obstruction of veins (vascular obstruction) of the liver.

symptoms:
In early stages, symptoms of Banti syndrome include weakness, fatigue, anemia , and abnormal enlargement of the spleen.  As the disorder progresses, the anemia becomes more severe.  The anemia may be aggravated by a bleeding esophagus that may cause vomiting of blood and the passage of dark stools composed of decomposing blood.  Ultimately, in some cases, the liver itself becomes enlarged and subdivided by fibrous tissue (cirrhosis).  However, the spleen enlargement in Banti syndrome is the primary symptom.
Patients with Banti syndrome bruise easily, are more likely to contract bacterial infections and carry a fever for longer periods of time.
Symptoms may also include abnormal accumulation of fluid in the abdominal cavity (ascites), weakness, fatigue; abnormally low levels of circulating red blood cells (anemia), white blood cells (leukopenia), and/or platelets (thrombocytopenia), and/or episodes of bleeding (hemorrhage) from the gastrointestinal tract.

