Barakat Syndrome

synonyms:
HDR syndromehypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness and renal dysplasia (or disease)

overview:
First described by Barakat, et al in 1977, the Barakat syndrome, also known as HDR syndrome is a clinically variable (heterogeneous), rare genetic disorder characterized by the triad of hypoparathyroidism (decreased function of the parathyroid glands which are small endocrine glands in the neck whose main function is to maintain the body calcium level), sensorineural deafness and renal disease.
Hypoparathyroidism occurs in about 93% of patients. Deafness is the most consistent feature of the syndrome occurring in about 96% of patients. It usually affects both ears and is characterized by early onset and moderate to severe sensorineural hearing loss. Renal disease occurs in about 72% of patients and includes congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (cystic, dysplastic, hypoplastic or aplastic kidneys, pelvicalyceal deformity, vesicoureteral reflux), blood in the urine (hematuria), increased protein excretion in the urine (proteinuria), nephrotic syndrome (kidney disorder resulting in loss of large amounts of protein in the urine), chronic kidney disease and others. Several additional features have been described; among others, congenital heart disease, facial and ocular abnormalities (retinitis pigmentosa, nystagmus, pseudopapilledema), basal ganglia calcifications, psoriasis, growth failure and cognitive disability. The likelihood of occurrence of each component increases with age, and by age 50 all patients will probably have all three components of the syndrome.

symptoms:
Since newborn hearing screening and prenatal ultrasonography are now performed routinely, deafness and congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract have become the more common modes of presentation. Patients may also present with symptoms associated with low blood calcium (hypocalcemia) caused by malfunction of the parathyroid glands such as muscle weakness, tetany and convulsions, or signs of kidney disease such as proteinuria, hematuria and chronic kidney disease. Deafness may be a presenting symptom or may be found on a routine hearing test at any age.

