Bardet-Biedl Syndrome

synonyms:
BBS

overview:
Summary
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a genetic condition that impacts multiple body systems. It is classically defined by six features. Patients with BBS can experience problems with obesity, specifically with fat deposition along the abdomen. They often also suffer from intellectual impairments. Commonly, the kidneys, eyes and function of the genitalia will be compromised. People with BBS may also be born with an extra digit on the hands. The severity of BBS varies greatly even among individuals within the same family. The symptoms discussed below are those generally seen with BBS. They may or may not be seen in any given person with the syndrome.
Introduction
Bardet-Biedl syndrome was historically termed Laurence-Moon-Biedl-Bardet syndrome by the physicians who described the first cases of the syndrome. It is now generally considered that Bardet-Biedl syndrome and Laurence-Moon syndrome (see Related Disorders) are distinct conditions.

symptoms:
The cardinal features of BBS are truncal obesity, intellectual impairment, renal anomalies, polydactyly, retinal degeneration and hypogenitalism. Each feature is discussed in detail below. The term ‘truncal obesity’ refers to a condition where fat is disproportionately distributed onto the abdomen and chest rather than the arms and legs. Individuals can be described as having an apple-shape body type. Weight is usually normal at birth but weight gain is quickly evident through the first year of life in as many as 90% of people with BBS. Diabetes mellitus (specifically, type II diabetes, non-insulin dependent) has been estimated to affect up to 45% of patients with BBS. Weight management problems may further complicate problems with the heart and blood vessels seen in patients with BBS. The heart functions as a pump for the blood, moving the blood through the vessels that bring it throughout the body. The heart relies on valves that keep the flow moving in the forward direction. With age, stiffening of the heart valves is completely normal. The stiffening is due to calcium laying down on the valves, and this process if described by the word “stenosis”. Patients with BBS may experience stenosis of their heart valves prematurely. They may also have defects of the heart’s muscular walls. The heart muscle is designed such that every motion is smoothly orchestrated. Defects in the heart muscle predispose people with BBS to heart beat abnormalities, referred to as “arrhythmias”. Most patients with BBS will experience the loss of a particular population of cells in the eye, specifically in the retina. The retina is part of the eye involved in detecting and decoding incoming images. Incoming light is focused onto the retina at the back of the eye. The retina is composed of cells called “rods and cones”. They translate incoming light into nerve impulses the brain can use. This gradual loss of the rod and cone cells on the retina is described as “dystrophy”. Symptoms associated with cone-rod dystrophy may not become apparent until 7 or 8 years of age when children begin to complain of an inability to see in dimly lit environments, such as a sidewalk lit only by streetlights. This “night blindness” may progress to variable degrees. In most people, the vision becomes progressively weaker through the first and second decades of life. Affected individuals often first lose peripheral vision, and see only what is directly in front of their focus point. They see in what is termed ‘tunnel vision’. Many affected individuals also eventually lose central vision and become legally blind, often by their mid-teens. In some people, the degeneration of the retina may follow a characteristic course, referred to as “retinitis pigmentosa”, (RP). RP begins with night blindness, followed by a loss of the ability to discriminate colors from one another, and finally to a progressive tunnel vision. (For more information, choose “Retinitis Pigmentosa” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database). Additional effects on the eye characteristic to individuals with BBS include: lazy eye (strabismus), clouding of the lens of the eyes (cataracts), and an increased pressure within the eyes that can result in damage to the optic nerve conducting signals to the brain (glaucoma).
Of note, many people with BBS also have problems with smell. They have a decreased ability to sense smells due to a change in the size to a brain center called the “olfactory bulb”. This is a relatively a mild problem but may impact safety if people are unable to sense for example, a gas leak from the stove.
People with BBS also experience an abnormality of the hands and feet. They may be born with an extra digit near the pinky or an extra toe near the fifth “little” toe. This finding occurs in approximately 70 percent of patients. Specifically, the presence of an extra toe is more common than that of an extra finger. In medical terminology, this is described as ‘postaxial polydactyly’. Fingers and toes may also show webbing, called “syndactyly”.  Syndactyly is especially common between the second and third toes. Fingers and toes may occasionally be abnormally short in length. This characteristic is called “brachydactyly”. The feet may overall be short in length, of wide width and carry a flat arch.
Another cardinal feature of BBS is a small size and poor function of the male gonads, termed “testicular hypogonadism”. This may manifest as a small penis, failure of the testes to descend into the scrotum (termed “cryptorchidism”) or a delay in the onset of puberty. Undescended testicles are a concern because they are associated with a greater risk for testicular cancer and should not be left unaddressed. Affected females may also have complex genital and urinary tract abnormalities. They may demonstrate an underdeveloped uterus, fallopian tubes, or ovaries. Menstruation cycles are often delayed from the average first age of onset and may also follow an irregular cycle.
Problems with fertility arise in both men and women. Pregnant women with BBS should be followed closely by obstetricians that are well trained in dealing with high-risk pregnancies.
Some individuals with BBS may develop anomalies of the structure and function of the kidneys. Renal defects are highly variable but generally result in an accumulation of urine in the kidneys that results in inappropriate pressures within the kidneys, leading to stretching of important structures. The dilation resulting from this fluid accumulation is called “hydronephrosis”. It can be monitored by medical imaging such as ultrasound, abdominal x-ray, etc. One common risk that accompanies hydronephrosis includes bacterial infection of the kidneys. The inflammation associated with infection of the kidneys is called “pyelonephritis”. These complications to renal functions can often predispose individuals with BBS to renal failure. Other manifestations of BBS include the development of a cysts and damage to the microscopic filtration unit of the kidney. Kidneys are responsible for filtering the blood and damage to the filtration systems manifest with urine that is dark red blood, possibly even foamy. In scenarios of kidney failure, patients may require dialysis and kidney transplantation. In the scenario that a patient requires kidney transplantation, the use of kidney-protective immunosuppressive medications have been associated with an extra increase in weight gain. This extra weight gain can further complicate any pre-existing diabetes.
Mild-to-moderate learning difficulties are common in individuals with BBS. Often, learning disabilities are attributed to weakened cognitive capacity. Some individuals affected with BBS may have true learning disabilities due to dysfunction of brain development. However, it is important to be sure that suspected disabilities (eg: delayed speech or reading skills) are not due to underlying visual impairment. Neurological impairments may manifest in poor coordination, gross and fine motor skills, and social milestones (eg: ability to play complicated games with other children). Many patients report a significant degree of clumsiness and often walk with legs in a wide-based stance. Walking heel-to-toe may be difficult.
Some individuals with BBS may also experience problems with their liver. The liver is responsible for many body processes. Among them, it produces a green-brown digestive fluid that the body needs to break food down properly. Specifically, the liver conducts bile through thin ducts that can develop dilation or stricture and leak digestive fluid into the liver, where it causes damage in the form of scarring. More rarely, problems with digestion may be due to Hirschsprung disease. Hirschsprung disease describes an absence of the nerves normally found in the colon that control the innate motion of the colon and move food along the tract.
A subgroup of affected individuals may exhibit some distinct facial features. These features including deep-set, widely-spaced eyes with downward-slanting lid folds, a flat nasal bridge with nostrils that flare forward, and a long groove (philtrum) in the center of the upper lip. Individuals may have a high-arched palate, with fewer teeth than expected The teeth may have short roots and lie crowded within the mouth.

