Bartter Syndrome

synonyms:
salt-losing tubulopathy with secondary hyperaldosteronism

overview:
Summary

Bartter syndrome is a general term for a group of rare genetic disorders in which there are specific defects in kidney function. These defects impair the kidney’s ability to reabsorb salt and cause imbalances in various electrolyte and fluid concentrations in the body. The electrolytes affected are primarily mineral salts such as potassium, calcium, magnesium, sodium, and chloride. The symptoms and severity of Bartter syndrome vary from one person to another and can range from mild to severe. Age of onset of overt symptoms can range from before birth to adulthood. Bartter syndrome is caused by alterations (mutations) in one of several different genes. Treatment is aimed at correcting the electrolyte imbalances through the use of supplements and certain medications such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs) and diuretics.

Introduction

Bartter syndrome was first described in the medical literature in the 1960s by Dr. Frederic Bartter. Through the years, different terminology has been used to describe these disorders. Some researchers classify these disorders based on their clinical appearance, while others classify them based on the underlying mutated gene. The different terminology and classification systems can be confusing. Bartter syndrome can be variably classified as a renal tubulopathy (because certain small tubes within the kidneys are affected), a salt-wasting disorder (because affected individuals excrete excess amounts of salt), a salt-losing tubulopathy, and a channelopathy (because the ion channels in the kidneys are affected). Although Bartter syndrome can be broken down into subtypes based on the underlying gene or symptomatology, considerable overlap of symptoms and disease presentation exists among the subtypes and Bartter syndrome may be best thought of as spectrum of disease caused by several different gene mutations. The most common classification system for these disorders is based upon the underlying genetic mutation as listed above. The term antenatal (before birth) Bartter syndrome refers to those cases who present before birth and is typically associated with types 1, 2, 4a and 4b. These disorders were sometimes also called hyperprostaglandin E syndromes because they are associated with elevated levels of compounds known as prostaglandins, which act as signaling molecules in our body. Bartter syndrome type 3 is sometimes also referred to as classic Bartter syndrome. Gitelman syndrome, which has considerable clinical overlap with Bartter syndrome, especially type 3, is sometimes grouped with the Bartter syndromes. NORD has a separate report on Gitelman syndrome.

symptoms:
The age of onset, severity and specific symptoms associated with Bartter syndrome can vary greatly from one person to another, even among individuals who have the same subtype. Some individuals may have mild cases; others may experience severe, potentially life-threatening complications, at birth.
Generally, Bartter syndromes types 1, 2, 4a, and 4b are associated with an early (before birth) age of onset and more severe symptoms. Bartter syndrome type 3 can also present before birth, but usually with milder symptoms (see below) and many patients with this subtype present in infancy or early childhood with growth problems. However, this is not a universal, absolute rule and exceptions exist. Therefore, affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below and certain symptoms, which are more prevalent with one subtype of Bartter syndrome, can occur in another subtype. It is important to note that every case is unique and will follow its own course.
Most medical sources will use specific terminology to describe the electrolyte imbalances that characterize the Bartter syndromes. These terms refer to findings on laboratory tests rather than specific symptoms. Such terms include low levels of potassium in the blood (hypokalemia), low levels of chloride in the blood (hypochloremia), excess alkaline levels in the body (metabolic alkalosis), high levels of renin in the blood (hyperreninemia), and high levels of aldosterone in the blood (hyperaldosteronemia).
Symptoms can vary substantially. Some affected individuals may only have mild symptoms. Common symptoms include muscle weakness, cramping, spasms and fatigue. Excessive thirst (polydipsia), excessive urination (polyuria), and the need to urinate at night (nocturia) may also occur. Despite excessive fluid intake, frequent urination can lead to dehydration. Some children may crave salt. Additional symptoms that may occur include constipation, vomiting, elevated body temperature, lethargy, and a general feeling of poor health.As children grow older, their growth rate may be below what would be expected based upon their age and gender (growth retardation). If left untreated, affected individuals may be shorter than would be expected as adults (short stature). Some children may experience delays in the reaching developmental milestones (developmental delays).
The signs and symptoms of the antenatal Bartter syndromes, also known as Bartter syndromes 1 and 2 and Bartter syndromes 4a and 4b, can be seen before birth (antenatal period). Abnormal kidney function in utero can lead to excessive urine production and an abnormal buildup of amniotic fluid around the developing fetus (polyhydramnios). Birth is often premature. In the newborn period, affected infants may experience excessive urination (polyuria) and life-threatening episodes of fever and dehydration. Vomiting and diarrhea may also occur.A special form is Bartter type 5: it manifests with excess amniotic fluid (polyhydramnios), that is typically severe leading to premature birth. In some instances, prematurity is so early that the baby is not viable outside the mother’s womb. Yet, within weeks of being born all the kidney symptoms of high urine output and electrolyte loss resolve spontaneously without any need for treatment. The gene underlying this condition is on the X-chromosome, so Bartter syndrome type 5 occurs predominantly in boys.
Some affected infants may have characteristic facial features including a triangularly-shaped face, prominent forehead, large eyes, prominent, pointed ears, and a “pouting” expression because of drooping of the corners of the mouth. In some cases, these distinctive features may be absent or so mild as to go unnoticed. Affected infants may fail to grow and gain weight as would be expected based upon age and gender (failure to thrive). Growth delays and growth retardation may be seen as affected children age, and final adult height may be shorter than would otherwise be expected (short stature).
In some individuals who experience significant electrolyte imbalances, severe complications, such as irregular heartbeats (cardiac arrhythmias) or muscle weakness (paralysis) may develop. Although rare, if untreated, these cardiac arrhythmias can potentially progress to cause sudden cardiac arrest and potentially sudden death.Patients with Bartter syndromes type 1 and 2 typically have elevated levels of calcium in the urine which can lead to the deposition of calcium in the kidney (nephrocalcinosis). In mild cases, there may not be any associated symptoms or minor symptoms including blood in the urine, vomiting, or fever. Affected individuals may pass stones made up of calcium. Calcium buildup (calcification) in the kidneys may eventually affect kidney function.
In Bartter syndrome types 4A and 4B, affected infants cannot hear from birth due to an impaired ability of the auditory nerves to transmit sensory input to the brain (congenital sensorineural deafness).
In some cases, cognitive and motor development is also affected and affected children may experience delays in reaching certain developmental milestones. This is likely related to the degree of prematurity.

