Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome

synonyms:
Beckwith-SyndromeBeckwith-Wiedemann spectrumBWSEMG syndromeexomphalos-macroglossia-gigantism syndromehypoglycemia with macroglossiaomphalocele-visceromegaly-macroglossia syndromevisceromegaly-umbilical hernia-macroglossia syndromeWiedemann-Beckwith syndrome

overview:
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is the most common overgrowth and cancer predisposition disorder. BWS is caused by changes on chromosome 11p15.5 and is characterized by a wide spectrum of symptoms and physical findings that vary in range and severity from person to person. Associated features include a large tongue (macroglossia),  abdominal wall abnormalities (omphalocele, umbilical hernia or diastasis recti), abnormal enlargement of one side or structure of the body (lateralized overgrowth) resulting in unequal (asymmetric) growth, an increased risk of developing certain childhood cancers, most commonly Wilms tumor (kidney tumor) and hepatoblastoma (liver tumor) and low blood sugar levels in the first few days of life (neonatal hypoglycemia) or beyond leading to persistent low blood sugars (hyperinsulinism). BWS may also be associated with above-average birth weight (large for gestational age), increased growth after birth (macrosomia), enlargement of certain internal organs (organomegaly), distinctive grooves in the ear lobes (ear creases and ear pits), and a characteristic facial appearance.
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome has been recently reclassified as Beckwith-Wiedemann spectrum as the clinical presentation can vary from patient to patient. Approximately 80% of people with BWS have chromosome changes that appear to occur randomly (sporadically). Familial transmission (inherited forms) occurs in about 5-10% of patients with BWS. About 14% of patients with BWS have an unknown cause for diagnosis. BWS affects at least one in 10,340 live births. Researchers have determined that BWS results from various abnormalities affecting the normal, proper expression of certain genes that control growth within a specific region of chromosome 11 (BWS critical region).

symptoms:
The characteristic features of BWS vary greatly from person to person, which can make clinical diagnosis based on physical exam findings and molecular diagnosis based on genetic testing challenging. Sometimes, the clinical and molecular diagnoses do not match because clinically the patients may not have many obvious physical features of BWS even if they have changes in the BWS critical region based on genetic testing. Some individuals may appear mildly affected while others appear more significantly affected. Affected individuals may not have all the symptoms listed. The range of clinical features due to changes on chromosome 11p15.5 has been redefined as the Beckwith-Wiedemann spectrum.
Some infants with BWS are born prematurely, but still have an excessive birth weight (large for gestational age). Over half of infants with BWS are above the 97th percentile in weight for gestational age. Overgrowth can continue throughout childhood (macrosomia). Abnormal enlargement of one side or structure of the body (lateralized overgrowth) may occur, resulting in asymmetric growth. Lateralized overgrowth or isolated lateralized overgrowth (ILO) is a new term used to describe what was previously called hemihypertrophy or hemihyperplasia. ILO is defined as asymmetric overgrowth of the body. ILO is not limited to one side of the body, and it does not specify what part or tissue is displaying overgrowth. For example, a patient may have a larger left arm and a larger right leg.
Abdominal wall abnormalities can include an omphalocele (also known as exomphalos), in which part of an infant’s intestines and other abdominal organs are outside of the body because of an opening in the belly button. The intestines and other organs are covered by a thin membrane. Less severe abdominal abnormalities can include protrusion of part of the intestines through an abnormal opening in the muscular wall of the abdomen near the umbilical cord (umbilical hernia), or weakness and separation of the left and right muscles of the abdominal wall (diastasis recti). Additionally, the internal organs of affected individuals can become abnormally enlarged (organomegaly). Any or all of the following organs may be affected: liver, spleen, pancreas, kidneys or adrenal glands.
Some newborns with BWS may have low blood sugar (neonatal hypoglycemia or hyperinsulinism) due to overgrowth and excessive secretion of the hormone insulin by the pancreas. Insulin helps regulate blood glucose levels by promoting the movement of glucose into cells. Most infants with neonatal hypoglycemia associated with BWS have mild and transient symptoms that resolve without treatment. However, without proper detection and appropriate treatment, neurological complications may result. Congenital hyperinsulinism is the most common cause for persistent and severe low blood sugar.
Patients with BWS may have an enlarged tongue (macroglossia), which can cause difficulties in speaking, feeding and breathing. In addition to macroglossia, BWS may be characterized by other differences of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region. Such features may include distinctive slit-like grooves or creases in the ear lobes and dimples on the back of the ears (ear creases or pits). Some infants may have flat, pale red or reddish-purple facial marks at birth, most commonly on the eyelids and forehead, which consist of abnormal clusters of small blood vessels (facial nevus simplex). Such marks typically become less apparent during the first year of life. In patients with lateralized overgrowth, one side of the face may appear larger than the other. Some patients may have improper contact of the teeth of the upper and lower jaws (malocclusion) and abnormal protrusion of the lower jaw (mandibular prognathism), features that may occur secondary to macroglossia.
A variety of kidney (renal) abnormalities can occur in individuals with BWS, including abnormally large kidneys (nephromegaly), improper development of the innermost tissues of the kidney (renal medullary dysplasia) and the formation of calcium deposits in the kidney (nephrocalcinosis), which could potentially impair kidney function. Additional abnormalities include duplication of the series of tubes and ducts through which the kidneys reabsorb water and sodium (duplicated collecting system), widening of some of the small tubes and collecting ducts (medullary sponge kidney) and the presence of small pouches (diverticula) on the kidneys. Kidney stones have been reported to occur in adolescents and adults with BWS.
Patients with BWS may have an increased risk of developing certain childhood cancers. Embryonal cancers occur in approximately 8% of patients with BWS. The most common types of tumors are Wilms tumor (a kidney tumor) and hepatoblastoma (a liver tumor). Neuroblastoma (a nerve cell tumor), rhabdomyosarcoma (a soft tissue tumor) and adrenal carcinoma (an adrenal gland tumor) have been reported more rarely. The overall tumor risk is highest during the first two years of life.
Many clinical features of BWS become less evident with increasing age and many adults experience normal growth and appearance. Neurological (brain) development appears to be unaffected in BWS, unless associated with prolonged, untreated neonatal hypoglycemia, extreme prematurity, or a chromosomal duplication. Adult patients may present with medical issues related to these clinical features, and some have required surgery in early childhood. Most features in adults with BWS, such as renal issues and back pain, are consequences of pediatric issues. However, more research is needed to determine the relationship between features of adults with BWS and pediatric symptoms.

