Behçet’s Syndrome

synonyms:
Adamantiades-Behcet's syndromeBDBehcet's disease

overview:
Behçet’s syndrome is a rare multisystem inflammatory disorder characterized by ulcers affecting the mouth and genitals, various skin lesions and abnormalities affecting the eyes. Symptoms include mucous membrane lesions of the mouth (canker sores) and genitals (ulcers) that tend to disappear and recur spontaneously. Inflammation of the eyes (anterior uveitis, posterior uveitis, or panuveitis) also affects individuals with Behçet’s syndrome. Additional systems of the body may also be affected including the joints, blood vessels, central nervous system and/or digestive tract. The exact cause of Behçet’s syndrome is unknown.

symptoms:
The earliest symptom of Behçet’s syndrome is usually painful canker sores on the mucous membranes that line the mouth (aphthous stomatitis). The sores are usually round or oval with reddish (erythematous) borders that may occur anywhere within the mouth. They may be shallow or deep and may appear as a single lesion or a cluster of multiple lesions. The sores typically heal within a few days, up to a week or more, without scarring, but frequently recur. They may precede other symptoms of Behçet’s syndrome by several years. Sometimes similar sores may appear on the genitals, specifically the scrotum and shaft of the penis in males and the vulva in females. The sores are also round and painful but may be larger and deeper than those affecting the mouth. These sores also recur, but unlike oral lesions, may tend to scar.
Behçet’s syndrome may also affect the eyes. Symptoms may include inflammation of the back of the eye (posterior uveitis) and inflammation of the front of the eye (anterior uveitis or iridocyclitis). Inflammation of the iris accompanied by pain, tearing (lacrimation) and the accumulation of pus (hypopyon iritis) may also occur. The retina may become inflamed resulting in blurred vision, abnormal sensitivity to light (photophobia) and/or, inflammation of the thin membranous layer of blood vessels behind the retina (chorioretinitis). Although the lesions that cause inflammation in various parts of the eyes may resolve, repeated recurrences may result in the partial loss of vision (decreased visual acuity) or complete blindness if the disease is uncontrolled. In some cases, eye abnormalities may be the first symptom of Behçet’s syndrome. In other cases, they may not develop until several years later.
Individuals with Behçet’s syndrome may also exhibit the formation of small, pus-filled growths on the skin (pustules). Some affected individuals, especially females, may develop lesions that resemble those of erythema nodosum, a skin disorder characterized by the formation of tender, reddish, inflammatory nodules on the front of the legs. These nodules disappear on their own (spontaneously) sometimes leaving faint scars or discoloration (pigmentation). Some individuals with Behçet’s syndrome may develop small eruptions that resemble acne (acneiform eruptions) and/or inflammation that mistakenly appear to affect the hair follicles on the skin (pseudofolliculitis).
In approximately 50 percent of cases of Behçet’s syndrome, affected individuals experience pain (arthralgia) and swelling in various joints of the body (polyarthritis). This may occur before, during, or after the onset of the other symptoms associated with Behçet’s syndrome. Pain, which can range from mild to severe, typically affects the joints of the knees, wrists, elbows and ankles, and may become chronic. Lasting damage to affected joints is extremely rare.
Individuals with Behçet’s syndrome may also have recurring ulcers in the digestive tract. Symptoms vary from mild abdominal discomfort to severe inflammation of the large intestine and rectum accompanied by diarrhea or bleeding.
Approximately 10%-20% of individuals with Behçet’s syndrome also have involvement of the central nervous system. These symptoms usually appear months or years after the initial symptoms of Behçet’s syndrome. Recurring attacks of inflammation involving the brain (parenchymal Neuro-Behçet) or the membranes that surround the brain or spinal cord (meningitis or meningoencephalitis) can result in neurological damage. Symptoms may include headache, the inability to coordinate voluntary movement (cerebellar ataxia), impaired muscle movements of the face and throat (pseudobulbar palsies), stroke and/or rarely, seizures.
Behçet’s syndrome causes inflammation of the blood vessels (vasculitis). Involvement of small vessels is thought to drive many of the problems that the disorder causes. In some instances, inflammation of the large veins, particularly those in the legs may occur along with the formation of blood clots (thrombophlebitis). The walls of an involved artery may bulge forming a sac (aneurysm). In very rare cases, blood clots from the veins travel to the lungs (pulmonary emboli) resulting in episodes of chest pain, coughing, difficult or labored breathing (dyspnea) and coughing up blood (hemoptysis).
Unlike most diseases which are classified as vasculitis, involvement of the kidneys or peripheral nerves is very rare.
It is especially important to identify Behçet’s disease when there is ocular, central nervous system or large blood vessel involvement as manifestations are usually the most serious.

