Bell’s Palsy

synonyms:
Antoni's Palsyfacial nerve palsyfacial paralysisidiopathic facial palsyrefrigeration palsy

overview:
Bell’s palsy is a non-progressive neurological disorder of the facial nerve (7th cranial nerve). This disorder is characterized by the sudden onset of facial paralysis that may be preceded by a slight fever, pain behind the ear on the affected side and weakness on one side of the face. Paralysis results from decreased blood supply (ischemia) and/or compression of the 7th cranial nerve. The exact cause of Bell’s palsy is not known. Viral (e.g., herpes zoster virus) and immune disorders are frequently suggested as a cause for this disorder. There may also be an inherited tendency toward developing Bell’s palsy.

symptoms:
The early symptoms of Bell’s palsy may include a slight fever, pain behind the ear and weakness on one side of the face. The symptoms may begin suddenly and progress rapidly over several hours and sometimes follow a period of stress or reduced immunity. The whole side of the face is affected.
In most cases of Bell’s palsy, only facial muscle weakness occurs, and the facial paralysis is temporary. Most cases resolve in two to three weeks. Approximately 80% of cases resolve within three months. However, some cases persist.
In severe cases of Bell’s palsy, the facial muscles on the affected side are completely paralyzed, causing that side of the face to become smooth, expressionless and immobile. Often the opening between the upper and lower eyelids (palpebral fissure) is enlarged and remains open during sleep. This may result in the inability to close the eye on the affected side. People with Bell’s palsy may not have a corneal reflex, which means that the eye on the affected side does not close when the cornea is touched.
If the compressed region of the facial nerve is higher than certain facial nerve branches, there may be a decrease in saliva and/or tear production. Some people with Bell’s palsy experience a loss of the sense of taste on one side of the mouth, drooling and an increased sensitivity to sound (hyperacusis) on the affected side of the head. In some cases, an affected individual’s response to a pinprick behind the ear is also decreased.
Recovery from Bell’s palsy depends on the extent and severity of damage to the 7th cranial nerve. If facial paralysis is only partial, complete recovery can be expected. The affected muscles usually regain their original function within one to two months. If, as recovery proceeds, the nerve fibers regrow to muscles other than the ones they originally supplied, there may be voluntary muscle movements of the face accompanied by involuntary contractions of other facial muscles (synkinesia). Crocodile tears (tears not brought on by emotion) associated with facial muscular contractions occasionally develop in the aftermath of Bell’s palsy, particularly when eating.

