Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo

synonyms:
BPPV

overview:
Summary
Benign paroxysmal position vertigo (BPPV) is a disorder characterized by brief, recurrent bouts of vertigo. Vertigo is a sensation of spinning, whirling or turning. Individuals often feel as if the room is moving or spinning, and they can lose their balance and have difficulty standing or walking. During the vertigo spells, affected individuals often have abnormal eye movements as well (nystagmus). BPPV is most often triggered by changes in head position. The severity of the disorder varies. In some people, it only causes mild symptoms, while in others it can potentially cause more severe, even debilitating symptoms. BPPV may disappear but sometimes it persists recurrently for many months. Most affected individuals can be easily and effectively treated by non-invasive methods such as canalith (or canalolith) repositioning maneuvers or procedures. However, BPPV may recur even after being effectively treated. BPPV is thought to be caused by the displacement of small calcium carbonate crystals within the inner ear. These tiny crystals originate from the gravity and acceleration sensing structures and become inappropriately located in one of three semicircular canals, which are tiny, interconnected, looped tubes that serve to detect movements of the head and play a role in helping the body maintain balance. The exact, underlying cause of this displacement is not always known (idiopathic). Recurrences are possible because additional calcium can become dislodged. The treatment maneuvers move the calcium particles back to the main vestibule, the chamber from which they originated. This stops the vertigo. However, the maneuvers do not prevent the shedding of additional calcium crystals in the future.
Introduction
BPPV has been identified as a clinical entity since the late 1800s. The term benign means that the disorder is not progressive and is not considered serious. Although labeled benign, BPPV can disrupt a person’s daily activities and affect quality of life. The term paroxysmal means that episodes arise suddenly and often unpredictably. The term positional means the disorder is contingent on a change of the position of the head. BPPV is one of the most common causes of vertigo.

symptoms:
The onset of an episode of BPPV is usually sudden following changes in head position. Often, ordinary movements such as turning over on one’s side, lying down, looking up, stooping or bending over can cause an episode. The severity of the disorder can vary greatly from one person to another. Factors that may affect the severity include the speed of head movement, the volume of calcium crystals that are moved and a person’s innate sensitivity to motion. For some people, only a slight positional change of the head can cause symptoms. This extreme sensitivity can cause near frequent sensations of tilting or dizziness. In other individuals, the disorder may only produce mild symptoms despite a rapid change of head position. In some affected individuals, symptoms may only be caused by very precise, specific movements. The duration of symptoms of BPPV may also vary and can potentially persist recurrently for days, weeks or months or become recurrent over many years.
Vertigo in individuals with BPPV usually lasts less than 30 seconds. Vertigo can lead to unsteadiness and a loss of balance. Additional symptoms can develop including lightheadedness, dizziness, nausea, vomiting and blurred vision. Nausea or a feeling of queasiness can persist for a short time even after the sensation of vertigo has passed.
A common associated finding with BPPV is nystagmus, an eye movement disorder characterized by rapid, involuntary movements of the eye. The eyes may be described as jumping or twitching in certain directions. Nystagmus associated with BPPV is fatigable meaning that if one repeats the position change that induced the original vertigo and nystagmus, after time nystagmus lessens in severity.
The type of nystagmus, defined by the direction of the abnormal eye movements, depends upon which of the three semicircular canals of the inner ear is involved. The three canals are known as the posterior, horizontal (lateral) and anterior (superior) canals. Thus, BPPV can be classified as posterior canal BPPV, horizontal canal BPPV or anterior canal BPPV based on the specific canal involved. About 80% of cases of BPPV involve the posterior canal.

