Benign Essential Blepharospasm

synonyms:
BEBblepharospasm

overview:
Summary
Benign essential blepharospasm (BEB) is a rare neurological disorder in which affected individuals experience involuntary muscle spasms and contractions of the muscles around the eyes. These spasms come and go (intermittent). Symptoms may begin as eye twitching and blinking and there may be symptoms of eye irritation. Eventually, BEB causes involuntary closure of the eyes. The exact cause of BEB is unknown. The disorder is one of a group of disorders collectively known as adult-onset focal dystonia.
Introduction
Dystonia is a group of movement disorders that vary in their symptoms, causes, progression and treatments. This group of neurological conditions is generally characterized by involuntary muscle contractions that force the body into abnormal, sometimes painful, movements and positions (postures).

symptoms:
In the early stages, benign essential blepharospasm is characterized by frequent or forced blinking and eye irritation that is often worsened by certain stimuli including bright lights, fatigue, emotional tension and environmental factors such as wind or air pollution. BEB virtually always affects both eyes (bilateral).
The frequency of muscle spasms and contractions may increase causing involuntary narrowing of the opening between the eyelids or closure of the eyelids. It may become progressively harder for affected individuals to keep their eyes open. In severe cases, the spasms may intensify to the point where the eyelids are closed several hours at a time. Although an individual’s vision remains unaffected, prolonged closure of the eyelids may cause a person to become functionally blind.
BEB may occur in association with dystonia of the lower part of the face, mouth or jaw. In these cases, BEB may be associated with jaw clenching, grimacing or tongue protrusion. This is called Meige syndrome or cranial dystonia. BEB may also be associated with abnormally dry eyes.
In most patients, spasms and contractions occur during the daytime and disappear while the individual is sleeping, only to recur the next day. Symptoms of BEB may be temporarily alleviated by a variety of activities including singing, laughing, yawning and chewing.
Other activities may worsen symptoms. Such activities include reading, walking, watching television, exposure to bright lights and driving. Stress may also worsen symptoms.

