Berylliosis

synonyms:
Acute Beryllium DiseaseBeryllium GranulomatosisBeryllium PneumonosisBeryllium Poisoning

overview:
Berylliosis is a form of metal poisoning caused by inhalation of beryllium dusts, vapors, or its compounds or implantation of the substance in the skin. The toxic effects of beryllium most commonly occur due to occupational exposure. Beryllium is a metallic element used in many industries, including electronics, high-technology ceramics, metals extraction, and dental alloy preparation.
There are two forms of beryllium-induced lung disease, acute and chronic. Acute berylliosis has a sudden, rapid onset and is characterized by severe inflammation of the lungs (pneumonitis), coughing, increasing breathlessness (dyspnea), and other associated symptoms and findings. In addition, in some individuals, the skin or the eyes may be affected. The more common, chronic form of the disease develops more slowly and, in some cases, may not become apparent for many years after initial beryllium exposure. Chronic berylliosis is characterized by the abnormal formation of inflammatory masses or nodules (granulomas) within certain tissues and organs and widespread scarring and thickening of deep lung tissues (interstitial pulmonary fibrosis). Although granuloma development primarily affects the lungs, it may also occur within other bodily tissues and organs, such as the skin and underlying (subcutaneous) tissues or the liver. In individuals with chronic berylliosis, associated symptoms and findings often include dry coughing, fatigue, weight loss, chest pain, and increasing shortness of breath.

symptoms:
Acute berylliosis is a rare condition that develops suddenly due to exposure to beryllium.  The condition is primarily characterized by severe inflammation of the lungs (pneumonitis).  Associated symptoms typically include an abrupt onset of coughing, and difficulties breathing (dyspnea).  Some affected individuals may also develop a sore throat (pharyngitis); inflammation of the mucous membranes of the nose (rhinitis) and associated nasal discharge; and inflammation of the windpipe and air passages of the lungs (tracheobronchitis).  In addition, in some cases, other areas of the body may be affected, such as the skin or eyes.  Although most individuals with acute berylliosis have a complete recovery with no residual effects, potentially life-threatening complications may result without prompt, appropriate treatment.  The severity of the condition may depend upon the duration of beryllium exposure, the concentration of the irritant, and/or other factors.
Chronic berylliosis is a systemic disease in which there is an abnormally exaggerated immune response (hypersensitivity) to beryllium.  The onset of symptoms after initial beryllium exposure may be extremely variable, ranging from a few months to years or even decades.  In those with chronic berylliosis, abnormal inflammatory nodules (granulomas) form in the lungs and, in some cases, within other bodily tissues.  These may include the lymph nodes, liver, skin and underlying (subcutaneous) tissues, and/or other organs and tissues.  Chronic berylliosis is also characterized by widespread scarring and thickening of deep lung tissues (interstitial pulmonary fibrosis).  Symptoms and findings associated with the disorder may include dry coughing; increasing shortness of breath (dyspnea); chest pain; fatigue; fever; night sweats; lack of appetite (anorexia); weight loss; and enlargement of lymph nodes.  Some may also develop reddened patches or small raised spots on the skin.  As the disease progresses, affected individuals may have increasingly severe lung damage, resulting in labored breathing with the slightest exertion; liver damage; and potentially life-threatening complications.

