Best Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy

synonyms:
Best macular dystrophyBest diseasevitelline dystrophyvitelliruptive degenerationmacular degeneration, polymorphic vitellinevitelliform macular dystrophy, early-onsetvitelliform macular dystrophy, juvenile-onsetvitelliform macular dystrophy, type 2

overview:
Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD) is a genetic form of macular degeneration (damage to a part of the eye called the macula) that occurs in about 1 in 10,000 individuals. The physical cause of BVMD is breakdown of the tissue in the retina called retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). The condition gets worse over time, starting with blurred central vision, and possibly leading to complete loss of central vision. Peripheral vision (vision from the sides of the eye) and the ability of the eye to adjust to dark are unaffected. The age of onset of BVMD can vary. Many individuals with BVMD have symptoms in childhood or early adulthood. BVMD is associated with a harmful genetic change (mutation) in theBEST1gene. There is no cure for BVMD, although some treatments and medications exist that can minimize the damage caused by breakdown of the RPE including anti-VEGF therapy (medicine used to prevent growth of new blood vessels in the eye), laser photocoagulation (laser treatment used to destroy leaky blood vessels), and photodynamic therapy (a combination of medicine and laser treatment used to get rid of bad eye cells).

symptoms:
BVMD has an average age of onset between age 5 and 10 but can vary from person to person. Affected individuals initially have normal vision and then experience blurred vision, reduced sharpness or clarity of vision or the appearance of objects that have a distorted shape (metamorphosia). BVMD affects central vision but usually not peripheral vision and varies in severity.
Some people with the disorder do not notice a decline in vision and may be diagnosed in passing from a routine eye exam. Others experience significant loss of vision, which can occur because of the formation of blood vessels under the macula and retina (choroidal neovascularization). The degree of visual loss can be different in each eye. Most individuals with BVMD have one eye more severely affected than the other and can continue to perform daily tasks such as driving well into the later decades of life.

