Beta-Mannosidosis

synonyms:
beta-D-mannosidosisbeta-mannosidase deficiencymannosidosis, beta A, lysosomallysosomal beta-mannosidase deficiency

overview:
Summary
Beta-mannosidosis (β-mannosidosis) is an extremely rare genetic disease that belongs to a larger group of lysosomal storage disorders. Lysosomal storage disorders are characterized by metabolic abnormalities that cause a build-up of various toxic materials in the lysosomal compartment of cells throughout the body. The signs and symptoms of beta-mannosidosis vary in both the severity and age of onset. Almost all affected individuals experience some degree of intellectual disability, and some have delayed motor development. Other signs and symptoms can include muscle abnormalities, seizures, speech and hearing difficulties, reduced sensations in extremities, repeat ear and respiratory infections, unique facial features, and behavioral and psychiatric challenges. Beta-mannosidosis is caused by changes (variants or mutations) in theMANBAgene and is typically inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms, progression and severity of beta-mannosidosis vary widely among affected individuals. Individuals may develop signs and symptoms between infancy and adulthood. It is important to note that every individual is unique and how the disorder affects one person can be different from how it affects another.
Degrees of developmental features are present in most individuals affected by beta-mannosidosis. A child’s progression through predictable developmental phases may be slowed, stopped or reversed (developmental delays). Global developmental delays, where more than one developmental area is affected, may be present. Most affected individuals experience intellectual delays ranging from mild to severe that can lead to intellectual disabilities. Some individuals may experience muscle function (motor) delays that can cause difficulty coordinating muscle movements needed to complete tasks. Speech development may be affected, leading to speech impairments.
Many individuals affected by beta-mannosidosis have altered muscle tone which can affect motor developmental milestones. Low muscle tone (hypotonia) is common and can contribute to difficulties with speech and swallowing, which can lead to feeding difficulties. Underdeveloped or incompletely developed muscles (hypoplasia) of the abdominal wall can cause the belly to appear bloated.
Nervous system features can include recurring seizures, hearing impairments or pain and reduced sensation in the extremities (peripheral neuropathy).
Immune dysfunction can occur in individuals affected by beta-mannosidosis leading to frequent and recurrent bacterial respiratory and ear infections.
Facial differences and skin anomalies can often be present. Affected individuals may have a different facial shape and coarse facial features are common. Occasionally, small, dark red spots may appear on the skin (angiokeratomas) formed from enlarged blood vessels.
Some individuals affected by beta-mannosidosis experience behavioral or psychiatric issues, including being extremely shy or being prone to depression, hyperactivity or impulsive or aggressive behavior.
Brain imaging findings
Limited information is available on brain MRI findings in people with beta-mannosidosis. A one-year-old male was reported to have mild-to-moderate cerebral hypomyelination on a brain MRI. A repeat MRI at age 4 years, 3 months of age redemonstrated poor myelination with hyperintensities in the white matter of the brain (Lund, et al 2019).

