Beta Thalassemia

synonyms:
Mediterranean anemia

overview:
Summary
Beta thalassemia is an inherited blood disorder characterized by reduced levels of functional hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is found in red blood cells; it is the red, iron-rich, oxygen-carrying pigment of the blood. A main function of red blood cells is to deliver oxygen throughout the body. Beta thalassemia has three main forms – minor, intermedia and major, which indicate the severity of the disease. Individuals with beta thalassemia minor usually do not have any symptoms (asymptomatic) and individuals often are unaware that they have the condition. Some individuals do experience very mild anemia. Individuals with beta thalassemia major have a severe expression of the disorder; they almost always require regular blood transfusions and lifelong, ongoing medical care.
The symptoms of beta thalassemia intermedia are widely variable, and severity falls in the broad range between the two extremes of the major and minor forms. The characteristic finding of beta thalassemia is anemia, which is caused because red blood cells are abnormally small (microcytic), are not produced at the normal amounts and do not contain enough functional hemoglobin. Consequently, affected individuals do not receive enough oxygen-rich blood throughout the body. Affected individuals may experience classic symptoms of anemia including fatigue, weakness, shortness of breath, dizziness or headaches. Severe anemia can cause serious, even life-threatening complications if left untreated. Affected individuals are treated by regular blood transfusions. Because of repeated blood transfusions individuals with beta thalassemia may develop excess levels of iron in the body (iron overload). Iron overload can cause a variety of symptoms affecting multiple systems of the body but can be treated with medications.
Beta thalassemia is caused by changes (variants or mutations) in the hemoglobin beta (HBB) gene. Individuals with beta thalassemia minor have a mutation in oneHBBgene, while individuals with the intermediate and major forms have mutations in bothHBBgenes.

Introduction
Thalassemia is a term for a group of disorders in which there is reduced levels of hemoglobin, decreased red blood cell production and anemia. There are two main forms – alpha thalassemia and beta thalassemia, each with various subtypes. Beta thalassemia minor, also known as beta thalassemia trait, is a common condition. Beta thalassemia major was first described in the medical literature in 1925 by an American physician – Thomas Cooley. Beta thalassemia major is also known as Cooley’s anemia. Today, the classic clinical picture of beta thalassemia major is rarely seen when treatment is initiated early and regularly for the condition. Because of the anemia and the need for transfusions, thalassemia is now described as either transfusion dependent thalassemia (TDT) or non-transfusion dependent thalassemia (NTDT) rather than minor, intermedia or major.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of beta thalassemia varies greatly from one person to another. Individuals with beta thalassemia minor do not develop symptoms of the disorder but may have a mild anemia. Many individuals with beta thalassemia minor go through life never knowing they carry an altered gene for the disorder.
A beta thalassemia major diagnosis is usually made during the first two years of life and individuals require regular blood transfusions and lifelong medical care to survive. When the disorder develops later during life, a diagnosis of beta thalassemia intermedia is given; individuals may only require blood transfusions on rare, specific instances.
BETA THALASSEMIA MAJORBeta thalassemia major, also known as Cooley’s anemia, is the most severe form of beta thalassemia. Affected infants exhibit symptoms within the first two years of life, often between 3 and 6 months after birth. The full or classic “description” of beta thalassemia major tends to primarily occur in developing countries. Most individuals will not develop the severe symptoms discussed below. Although beta thalassemia major is a chronic, lifelong illness, if individuals follow the current recommended treatments, most individuals can live happy, fulfilling lives.
Severe anemia develops and is associated with fatigue, weakness, shortness of breath, dizziness, headaches, and yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes and whites of the eyes (jaundice). Affected infants often fail to grow and gain weight as expected based upon age and gender (failure to thrive). Some infants become progressively pale (pallor). Feeding problems, diarrhea, irritability or fussiness, recurrent fevers, abnormal enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly), and the abnormal enlargement of the spleen (splenomegaly) may also occur.
Splenomegaly may cause abdominal enlargement or swelling. Splenomegaly may be associated with an overactive spleen (hypersplenism), a condition that can develops because too many blood cells build up and are destroyed within the spleen. Hypersplenism can contribute to anemia in individuals with beta thalassemia and cause low levels of white blood cells, increasing the risk of infection, and low levels of platelets, which can lead to prolonged bleeding.
If untreated, additional complications can develop. Beta thalassemia major can cause the bone marrow, the spongy material within certain bones, to expand. Bone marrow is where most of the blood cells are produced in the body. The bone marrow expands because it is trying to compensate for chronic anemia. This abnormal expansion causes bones to become thinner, wider and brittle. Affected bones may grow abnormally (bone deformities), particularly the long bones of the arms and legs and certain bones of the face. When facial bones are affected it can result in distinctive facial features including an abnormally prominent forehead (frontal bossing), full cheek bones (prominent malar eminence), a depressed bridge of the nose, and overgrowth (hypertrophy) of the upper jaw (maxillae), exposing the upper teeth. The affected bones have an increased fracture risk, particularly the long bones of the arms and legs. Some individuals may develop ‘knock knees’ (genu valgum), a condition in which the legs bend inward so that when a person is standing the knees will touch even if the ankles and feet are not.
Even when treated, complications may develop, specifically the buildup of iron in the body (iron overload). Iron overload results from the blood transfusions required to treat individuals with beta thalassemia major. In addition, affected individuals experience greater iron absorption from the gastrointestinal tract, which contributes to iron overload (although this primarily occurs in untreated individuals). Iron overload can cause tissue damage and impaired function of affected organs such as the heart, liver and endocrine glands. Iron overload can damage the heart causing abnormal heart rhythms, inflammation of the membrane (pericardium) that lines the heart (pericarditis), enlargement of the heart and disease of the heart muscle (dilated cardiomyopathy). Heart involvement can progress to life-threatening complications such as heart failure. Liver involvement can cause scarring and inflammation of the liver (cirrhosis) and high pressure of the main liver vein (portal hypertension). Endocrine gland involvement can cause insufficiency of certain glands such as the thyroid (hypothyroidism) and, in rare cases, diabetes mellitus. Iron overload can also be associated with growth retardation and the failure or delay of sexual maturation.
Additional symptoms that may occur include masses that form because of blood cell production outside of the bone marrow (extramedullary hematopoiesis). These masses primarily form in the spleen, liver, lymph nodes, chest, and spine and can potentially cause compression of nearby structures and a variety of symptoms. Affected individuals may develop leg ulcers, an increased risk of developing blood clots within a vein (venous thrombosis) and decreased bone mineralization resulting in brittle bones that are prone to fracture (osteoporosis).
BETA THALASSEMIA INTERMEDIAIndividuals diagnosed with beta thalassemia intermedia have a widely varied expression of the disorder. Moderately severe anemia is common and affected individuals may require periodic blood transfusions. Each individual case is unique. Common symptoms include pallor, jaundice, leg ulcers, gallstones (cholelithiasis), and abnormal enlargement of the liver and spleen. Moderate to severe skeletal malformations (as described in beta thalassemia major) may also occur.
DOMINANT BETA THALASSEMIADominant beta thalassemia is an extremely rare form in which individuals who have one mutatedHBBgene develop certain symptoms associated with beta thalassemia. Affected individuals may develop mild to moderate anemia, jaundice, and an abnormally enlarged spleen (splenomegaly).

