Bile Acid Synthesis Disorders

synonyms:
BASDbile acid synthesis defects

overview:
Summary
Bile acid synthesis disorders (BASDs) are a group of rare metabolic disorders characterized by defects in the creation (synthesis) of bile acids. Bile acids are chemical compounds found in the liver that have several roles in the body including promoting the flow and excretion of bile and assisting in the intestinal absorption of fat and fat-soluble vitamins. Bile acids are formed from cholesterol and, therefore, bile acid synthesis serves as the main pathway in breaking down and eliminating cholesterol from the body (cholesterol degradation). The failure to produce normal or functional bile acids results in the accumulation of abnormal bile acids and other substances that normally would be broken down (intermediary metabolites) within the body. The resulting accumulation of abnormal bile acids, intermediary metabolites and cholesterol in the body can damage certain organ systems. The main symptom of most (but not all) BASDs is interruption or suppression of the flow of bile from the liver (cholestasis) and fat-soluble vitamin malabsorption. Additional symptoms such as progressive neurological disease may develop in certain cases and can occur in the absence of liver disease. In many cases, symptoms or signs are present at birth or during the newborn period. If untreated, the more severe forms of these disorders can eventually progress to cause life-threatening complications such as scarring of the liver (cirrhosis) and liver failure. Many of these disorders can be successfully treated by replacing the missing bile acids (bile acid replacement therapy). BASDs are caused by mutations in specific genes; most of these mutations are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
Introduction
Disorders of bile acid synthesis can be broadly classified as primary or secondary. Primary BASDs involve congenital deficiencies in enzymes required for bringing about chemical reactions (catalyzing) necessary to synthesize the two main bile acids known as cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid. Secondary disorders include disorders that are involved in the transport of bile acids such as low gamma-GT familial intrahepatic cholestasis and MDR3 deficiency (known collectively as primary familial intrahepatic cholestasis), Smith-Lemli-Optiz syndrome, which impairs the supply of cholesterol in the body, and Zellweger spectrum disorders, which are classified as peroxisomal disorders, but are involved in bile acid synthesis as well. This report only covers certain primary bile acid synthesis disorders. NORD has individual reports on the secondary types. For more information, choose the specific disorder name as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.

symptoms:
Although researchers have been able to establish clear syndromes with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about bile acid synthesis disorders is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified cases, the lack of large clinical studies, and the possibility of other genes influencing these disorders prevent physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Parents should talk to their children’s physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
The age of onset, specific symptoms, and rate of progression can vary greatly from one individual to another depending, in part, on the specific underlying defect. Although BASDs are usually detected in newborns or infants, milder forms of these disorders with later onset exist including cases with onset during adulthood.
Cholestasis in these disorders is intrahepatic, which means it occurs due to defects in the bile ducts within the liver rather than in the bile ducts outside the liver (extrahepatic). Features of cholestasis may include yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes and whites of the eyes (jaundice), failure to thrive, and growth deficiency. Enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly) and/or spleen (splenomegaly) may also occur. Persistent, severe itchiness (pruritus) is common to other disorders that cause cholestasis, but rarely occurs in individuals with BASDs. Affected individuals may also exhibit diarrhea, excess fats in the stools (steatorrhea), and pale or clay-colored stools due to the suppression of bile flow (acholic stools).
Some of the symptoms of cholestasis result from impairment of the digestive system to properly absorb fat, fat-soluble vitamins, and other nutrients (malabsorption). Malabsorption leads to vitamin deficiency and can result is various symptoms including rickets, a condition marked by softened, weakened bones (vitamin D deficiency), vision problems (vitamin A deficiency), poor coordination and development delays (vitamin E deficiency), and blood clotting problems leading to easy bleeding and bruising (vitamin K deficiency).
In some cases, progressive neurological disease has been described that develops later during childhood or during adulthood. Vitamin E deficiency from undiagnosed liver disease may contribute to neurological disease. In other cases, the cause of neurological disease may be different. For example, in CTX neurological disease results from the accumulation or storage of cholesterol-like, fatty substances in nerve cells and the brain.
In some cases, without treatment liver abnormalities can progress to cause serious life-threatening complications such as the formation of fibrous, scar tissue (fibrosis) and liver regeneration with scarring (cirrhosis), high blood pressure of the main vein of the liver (portal hypertension), and abnormal fluid retention and swelling in the abdomen (ascites). Eventually, liver disease can progress to cause liver failure.
3-BETA-HYDROXY-DELTA-5-C27-STEROID OXIDOREDUCTASE DEFICIENCYThis disorder is sometimes referred to as 3HSD deficiency or bile acid synthesis defect 1. It is believed to be the most common form of BASDs. The clinical picture of this disorder can vary greatly. Generally, affected individuals will develop cholestasis and fat-soluble vitamin malabsorption (and various abnormalities secondary to vitamin deficiency) during infancy. If untreated, progressive liver disease occurs.
In recent years, cases of idiopathic cholestasis that develop during adulthood (late onset liver disease) have been attributed to 3beta-dehydrogenase deficiency. Some of these individuals presented with jaundice during infancy, but improved and were not diagnosed with 3beta-dehydrogenase deficiency until later during life.
DELTA4 3-OXOSTEROID 5BETA REDUCTASE DEFICIENCYThis disorder is sometimes referred to as 5beta-reductase deficiency or bile acid synthesis defect 2. The clinical picture of this disorder is similar to that of 3beta-dehyddrogenase deficiency, but generally is more severe and, if untreated, can rapidly progress to cirrhosis and liver failure. 5beta-reductase deficiency can present as neonatal cholestasis or as liver failure that resembles liver disease seen in neonatal hemochromatosis (for more information, choose “neonatal hemochromatosis” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
OXYSTEROL 7-ALPHA-HYDROXYLASE DEFICIENCYThis disorder is sometimes referred to as bile acid synthesis defect 3. Only a few cases have been reported in the medical literature. Affected infants have exhibited severe neonatal cholestasis, disease affecting the blood’s ability to clot (coagulopathy), hepatosplenomegaly, and, if untreated, cirrhosis and liver failure early in life. Researchers speculate that due to the severity most cases of this disorder prove fatal before birth or shortly after birth.
ALPHA-METHYLACYL-COA RACEMASE (AMACR) DEFICIENCYThis disorder is sometimes referred to as 2-methylacyl-CoA racemase deficiency or bile acid synthesis defect 4. The disorder was first reported in three adults presenting with sensory motor neuropathy, a condition in which there is disease of the peripheral nerves (those outside the central nervous system) that control response to pain and temperature and muscle coordination. Sensory motor neuropathy may cause abnormal sensations such as numbness or a feeling of pins and needles in the arms and legs, weakness of the muscles, and problems with balance and coordination. Adults with this disorder may lack symptoms (asymptomatic) until sensory motor neuropathy develops or they may have mild liver disease during childhood. It is not known if asymptomatic adults who develop neurological disease had mild, undiagnosed liver disease that led to fat-soluble vitamin deficiency that eventually caused the neurological findings. This disorder has also been reported in infants who present with severe fat and fat-soluble vitamin deficiencies and mild cholestasis. Fewer than 10 cases have been reported in the medical literature.
STEROL 27-HYDROXYLASE DEFICIENCY (CEREBROTENDINOUS XANTHOMATOSIS)This disorder is also known as cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX). CTX is highly variable and is associated with a wide range of potential abnormalities. Originally, the disorder was believed only to be a neurological disorder of abnormal fat (lipid) storage not associated with liver disease. It is now know that CTX can present in childhood with cholestatic liver disease that can be severe or can be mild and resolve on its own in individuals who may later develop other complications of the disorder such as neurological disease. Patients with CTX not infrequently also have diarrhea.
In CTX, cholestanol deposits accumulate in nerve cells and membranes, causing damage to the brain, spinal cord, tendons, lens of the eyes and arteries. Affected individuals may develop cataracts during childhood and benign, fatty tumors (xanthomas) of the tendons during adolescence. If untreated, progressive neurological problems develop in adulthood potentially causing paralysis, ataxia, and dementia. Coronary heart disease is also common. Many individuals with the adult symptoms of CTX experienced prolonged cholestatic jaundice during infancy.
NORD has an individual report on CTX. For more information, choose “cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.
TRIHYDROXYCHOLESTANIC ACID (THCA) COA OXIDASE DEFICIENCYThis form has been reported in several individuals and is characterized primarily by neurological findings including ataxia, which often became apparent by 3 and half years of age. Liver disease has not been described in this form of BSAD.
AMIDATION DEFECTSThe final step in bile acid synthesis involves the joining together (conjugation) of two amino acids, glycine and taurine. Disorders involving this step are known as “defective bile acid amidation due to failure to conjugate with glycine and/or taurine” or more simply amidation defects. Two disorders in this subcategory have been identified.
Bile Acid CoA Ligase DeficiencyThis disorder is characterized by neonatal cholestasis, fat and fat-soluble vitamin malabsorption and growth failure. Fewer than 10 cases have been reported in the medical literature.
Amino Acid N-Acyltransferase DeficiencyThis disorder was initially described in several individuals within a large Amish kindred. Affected individuals developed pruritus, variable growth deficiency, and fat malabsorption (familial hypercholanemia). More recently a report has appeared that included description of 10 affected patients with only one from an Amish kindred. The presentation was quite varied in this case series with one family member having liver failure in infancy; however, most patients presented with poor growth and fat soluble vitamin deficiencies.

