Biliary Atresia

overview:
Biliary atresia is a rare gastrointestinal disorder characterized by destruction or absence of all or a portion of the bile duct that lies outside the liver (extrahepatic bile duct). The bile duct is a tube that allows the passage of bile from the liver into the gall bladder and, eventually, the small intestine. Bile is a liquid secreted by the liver that plays an essential role in carrying waste products from the liver and promoting absorption of fats and vitamins by the intestines. In biliary atresia, absence or destruction of the bile ducts results in the abnormal accumulation of bile in the liver. Affected infants have yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice) and scarring of the liver (fibrosis). In some cases, additional abnormalities may be present, including heart defects and intestinal, spleen and kidney malformations. The exact cause of biliary atresia is unknown.

symptoms:
The symptoms of biliary atresia usually appear by the age of two to six weeks and include a yellowish coloration of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice), abnormally pale stools, and dark urine. Infants may also have swollen (distended) stomach and/or abnormal enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly). By the age of six to 10 weeks, additional symptoms may also develop including poor weight gain, irritability and/or an increase in blood pressure within the veins that carry blood from the intestine to the liver (portal hypertension). Bile ducts inside the liver (intrahepatic bile ducts) are also involved. If left untreated, biliary atresia may result in permanent scarring of the liver (cirrhosis) and, eventually, liver (hepatic) failure.
Some children with biliary atresia may have additional congenital abnormalities including malformations of the heart (e.g., situs inversus, levocardia, and ventricular septal defects) and/or kidneys. Situs inversus is a condition in which the internal organs are on the opposite side of the body from normal. Levocardia is a condition in which the heart is malpositioned. (For more information on ventricular septal defects see the Related Disorders section below.)
Additional features may be associated with some cases of biliary atresia including absence of the spleen (asplenia), the presence of more than one spleen (polysplenia), and/or other anatomical abnormalities.

