Binder Type Nasomaxillary Dysplasia

synonyms:
Binder syndromemaxillonasal dysplasianasomaxillary hypoplasia

overview:
Summary
Binder type nasomaxillary dysplasia is a rare developmental defect that is present at birth (congenital). The disorder is characterized by the underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the central portion of the face, particularly the area including the nose and upper jaw (maxillonasal region). The specific symptoms and the severity of the disorder can vary from one person to another. Characteristic symptoms include an abnormally short, flattened nose and underdevelopment of the upper jaw bone (maxillary bone). The exact cause of Binder syndrome is not fully understood. Most cases appear to occur sporadically, but familial cases have been reported as well. Surgical and orthodontic treatment is recommended.
Introduction
Binder type nasomaxillary dysplasia was first described in the medical literature as far back 1882. Dr. Noyes described the essential features in a single patient in 1939. Dr. von Binder first identified the condition as a distinct clinical entity in 1962 in a comprehensive report of three children; the disorder now bears his name. There is some debate in the medical literature as to whether Binder type nasomaxillary dysplasia is a syndrome or an association. A syndrome is typically a genetic disorder, in which a group of symptoms consistently occur together. An association is a nonrandom collection of birth defects that may have been caused by a number of factors, including genetic ones, and can potentially be associated with a variety of underlying conditions.

symptoms:
Although researchers have been able to establish characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about Binder type nasomaxillary l dysplasia is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified affected individuals, the lack of large clinical studies, and the possibility of other genes influencing the disorder prevent physicians from developing an accurate picture of associated symptoms and prognosis.
The characteristic finding of the disorder is the abnormal development (dysplasia) of the central or mid portion of the face. The midface appears abnormally flattened. In some patients the frontal sinuses may be underdeveloped or absent. Affected individuals have a short nose and flattened bridge of the nose. The nasal bones may be underdeveloped or abnormally positioned. The bottom of the sheet of cartilage and bone (nasal septum) that separates the right and left nostrils is known as the columella. The columella is abnormally short and the nostrils have a half-moon or comma-shaped appearance. In cases where the columella is severely short, the nostrils may appear triangular. The upper lips may be slanted backward. Despite the various nasal abnormalities, the sense of smell is unaffected.
Underdevelopment (hypoplasia) upper jaw (maxillary bone) is another key feature of Binder type nasomaxillary dysplasia. The maxillae are the large bones of that form the upper jaw and assist in the formation of the nasal cavities, the bony cavities of the eyes (orbits), and the roof of the mouth (palate). The maxillae also contain the sockets of the upper teeth. Hypoplasia of the upper jaw may cause the lower jaw (mandible) to appear to protrude or stick out (relative prognathism). However, in some individuals, the mandible may actually be longer than normal (true prognathism). Affected individuals also develop malocclusion, a condition in which the upper teeth are improperly positioned in relation to the lower teeth. More specifically, affected individuals may be predisposed to a reverse overbite (class III malocclusion), in which the lower jaw is too far forward, the cusps of the lower back teeth are abnormally positioned in front of the corresponding upper teeth, and the lower front teeth (incisors) meet or lie in front of the corresponding upper incisors.
In some cases, additional symptoms and physical findings have been reported in association with this condition. Individuals with Binder type nasomaxillary dysplasia seem to be at an increased risk of various malformations of the spine (vertebrae). Less often, affected individuals exhibit hearing impairment, incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate), misalignment of the eyes (strabismus), structural malformations of the heart (congenital heart defects), mild intellectual disability, and other features. However, the exact relationship between these findings and Binder type nasomaxillary dysplasia is unknown and they may not represent symptoms of the disorder.

