Binswanger Disease

synonyms:
Binswanger encephalopathymulti-infarct dementia, Binswanger typesubcortical arteriosclerotic encephalopathy, SAEsubcortical dementiasubcortical ischemic vascular diseasevascular dementia, Binswanger type

overview:
Binswanger disease is a progressive neurological disorder caused by arteriosclerosis and thromboembolism affecting the blood vessels that supply the white-matter (nerve fiber pathways) and clusters of nerve cells (basal ganglia and thalamus) beneath the surface of the brain (cerebral cortex). Most patients experience progressive loss of memory and intellectual abilities (dementia), urinary urgency or incontinence and an abnormally slow, shuffling, unsteady pattern of walking, usually over a 5–10-year period. Due to their vascular etiology, the symptoms and physical findings associated with Binswanger disease may suddenly worsen due to stroke, stabilize and then improve for a brief time, but the patient’s overall condition continues to progress as the blood vessels become increasingly obstructed.

symptoms:
Affected individuals often become depressed, uncaring (apathetic), inactive and unable to act or make decisions (abulic). They become withdrawn and exhibit poor judgement, reduced planning and organizational skills, and less spontaneous communication. In addition, affected individuals may have difficulty with speech (dysarthria), swallowing (dysphagia) and urinary bladder control (incontinence). Some patients exhibit abnormalities similar to those seen in Parkinson disease, such as slowness, poor balance and short, shuffling steps (Parkinsonism). Tremor is usually not a feature.
Many individuals with Binswanger disease have a history of strokes or transient ischemic attacks. Consequently, some symptoms and signs of this disease may develop in a stuttering or stepwise fashion, but there is also gradual deterioration due to progressive destruction of nerve fiber pathways deep in the brain (subcortical white matter). Therefore, Binswanger disease may be difficult to discern from neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer disease and dementia with Lewy bodies, which begin insidiously and progress gradually (see Related Disorders). Furthermore, Binswanger disease and neurodegenerative diseases commonly coexist in the same patient because these conditions are so common in older people.

