Biotinidase Deficiency

synonyms:
BTD deficiencyinfantile multiple carboxylase deficiencyjuvenile multiple carboxylase deficiencylate-onset multiple carboxylase deficiencymultiple carboxylase deficiency, due to biotinidase deficiencydelayed-onset biotinidase deficiencyprofound biotinidase deficiencypartial biotinidase deficiency

overview:
Summary
Biotinidase deficiency (BTD) deficiency is a treatable, inherited condition. BTD affects the way the body processes a vitamin called biotin (sometimes called vitamin H). Biotin is an important vitamin that helps the body break down protein, fats, and carbohydrates.
Biotinidase is an enzyme that helps recycle biotin to be reused by the body. Bitotinidase deficiency happens when this enzyme this isn’t working properly. BTD is caused by genetic changes (mutations) in theBTDgene.
If untreated, BTD can cause health problems such as:
SeizuresMuscle weakness (hypotonia)Problems with controlling body movements (ataxia)Developmental delayProblems with vision and hearing
BTD can have other features as well, including skin differences like rashes (eczema) and hair loss (alopecia).
BTD can be treated by giving people with the condition extra biotin for their body to use. If treated early, people with BTD can avoid all symptoms of the condition and lead a normal, healthy life.
Introduction
Biotinidase deficiency is sometimes categorized into groups depending on how much of the biotinidase enzyme is working. These two categories are profound BTD and partial BTD. People with profound BTD tend to have more severe symptoms earlier in life than people with partial BTD. Both forms of BTD can be treated with biotin supplements. Early diagnosis and treatment of BTD can prevent symptoms from happening. Nearly all infants with either profound or partial BTD can be detected in the US by newborn screening. However, not every country has added BTD to its newborn screening program.

symptoms:
Infants with BTD may be born without signs of the condition. Symptoms of BTD usually appear after the first few weeks or months of life. Treating BTD with biotin supplements before symptoms show up can prevent them from happening. Below is a list of symptoms that infants and children with profound untreated BTD may have. It is important to know that not every person with BTD will show all of these symptoms.
Many of the symptoms of BTD are neurological, which means they affect the brain and nervous system.
About 70% of infants with BTD will experience seizures if they are not treated. This is often the first symptom of the condition. Seizures in infants may look different than seizures in adults. Some signs of seizures in infants include:
Staring spellsJerking arm or leg movementsStiffening of the bodyFlickering of the eyelids
Because the seizures are caused by the body being unable to recycle biotin, they may not stop with seizure medications (anticonvulsants). However, the seizures do respond to biotin therapy and often should stop within minutes to hours of receiving biotin treatment.Some infants with BTD may have weak muscles and low muscle tone. This is called hypotonia. Infants with hypotonia may look abnormally “floppy.” Hypotonia can affect feeding and motor skills such sitting up without assistance.Affected infants and children may experience delays in reaching developmental milestones, including holding one’s head up or pulling up to stand.Infants with BTD may also have problems with vision or hearing. These issues can be prevented if biotin therapy is started early.Some other common features of BTD include eye infections, like pink eye (conjunctivitis), hair loss (alopecia), and a certain type of skin rash called eczema.Infants with BTD may have specific molecules in their urine, such as lactic acid (lactic aciduria) or low but noticeable amounts of ammonia.Some infants may have other symptoms like:
Trouble controlling their body’s movements (ataxia)Breathing problemsDrowsiness (lethargy)Enlarged liver (hepatomegaly)Enlarged spleen (splenomegaly)Speech problems.
Without treatment with biotin, infants with BTD can develop coma and may even die.
Children and adults with partial biotinidase who don’t receive biotin supplements may show mild symptoms of the condition during times of stress, like times of illness.

