Birt-Hogg-Dubé Syndrome

synonyms:
BHD syndromeHornstein-Knickenberg syndrome

overview:
Summary
Birt-Hogg-Dubé (BHD) syndrome is a rare complex genetic skin disorder (genodermatosis) characterized by the development of skin papules generally located on the head, face and upper torso. These benign (noncancerous) tumors of the hair follicle are called fibrofolliculomas. BHD syndrome also predisposes individuals to the development of benign cysts in the lungs, repeated episodes of a collapsed lung (pneumothorax) and increased risk for developing kidney neoplasia. BHD syndrome is caused by changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in theFLCNgene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.

Introduction
BHD syndrome was first described in the medical literature in 1977 by three Canadian physicians (Drs. Birt, Hogg and Dubé) for whom the disease was named.

symptoms:
The symptoms of Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome vary from person to person. The most common symptoms are multiple, benign skin lesions, lung (pulmonary) cysts, increased risk of repeated collapsed lungs (pneumothorax) and kidney (renal) neoplasia (malignant and benign tumors). Skin papules are the most frequent symptom occurring in up to 85% of individuals with BHD, but some affected individuals may develop lung cysts/pneumothorax and renal neoplasia without skin lesions. Symptoms of BHD may vary in affected members of a single BHD family who inherit the sameFLCNgene variant, and patients may develop one, two or all three of the characteristic features in any combination.
The skin papules known as fibrofolliculomas that are associated with BHD syndrome commonly occur on the scalp, face and neck, but can also be found on the ear lobes and in the oral mucosa. They are generally 2-3mm in size, dome shaped, flesh-colored and are not associated with any pain or discomfort. The onset is usually after the age of 20. Skin lesions may increase in number as affected individuals age. The number of skin lesions can vary dramatically; some individuals may only have a few skin lesions, while others may have a hundred or more.
In the original description of BHD syndrome, two other skin lesions were noted: trichodiscomas, benign tumors of the hair disc, and acrochordons or skin tags that appear as soft small growths that hang off the skin and are common in the general population. Some researchers believe that trichodiscomas and fibrofolliculomas are the same lesion despite different surface appearances.Individuals with BHD syndrome may also develop multiple lung (pulmonary) cysts in both lungs, which occur in greater than 80% of individuals affected with BHD. These cysts usually do not cause symptoms (asymptomatic) and lung function is generally normal, but up to one-third of affected individuals may experience repeated occurrences of a collapsed lung (spontaneous pneumothorax). A collapsed lung occurs when air or gas is trapped in the space surrounding the lungs. When the cause is not known (e.g., trauma, injury), it is referred to as spontaneous. Pneumothorax in BHD syndrome occurs more often in younger individuals and has been reported in children as young as 7 years old. Individuals in a BHD family who inherit the diseae-causingFLCNvariant have a 50-fold greater risk of developing spontaneous pneumothorax than their unaffected siblings.
Approximately 15-30 % of individuals with BHD syndrome may develop multiple kidney (renal) neoplasms. These are usually slow growing and can affect both kidneys (bilateral). The mean age of diagnosis for renal neoplasia is 48-50 years old. The most common tumor types are the hybrid oncocytic tumor (a hybrid consisting of both oncocytoma and chromophobe histologic cell types), and chromophobe renal cell carcinoma, both of which are malignant (cancerous). Renal oncocytomas, which are benign tumors, can also develop but occur only rarely. Individuals affected with BHD have a 7-fold greater risk of developing renal neoplasia than siblings who do not inherit theFLCNvariant.
In 1975, two researchers reported on a disorder that became known as Hornstein-Knickenberg syndrome. This disorder is now considered to be the same as BHD syndrome. Affected individuals with Hornstein-Knickenberg syndrome had polyps in the colon in addition to skin lesions. Some researchers believe that colonic polyps are a coincidental finding in individuals with BHD syndrome and not part of the disorder; more family studies are needed to determine whether colon polyps are an additional symptom of BHD.
Other findings have been reported in a few cases of BHD syndrome including oral papules in the mouth, benign tumors consisting of fatty tissue (lipomas), benign tumors consisting of fatty tissue and an abnormally large number of blood vessels (angiolipomas), a benign tumor of the parathyroid glands (parathyroid adenoma), a benign tumor of the salivary gland (parotid oncocytoma) and a lesion or birthmark consisting of thickened, abnormally firm connective tissue (connective tissue nevus). Researchers do not know whether these findings are incidental or true manifestations of BHD syndrome.

