Björnstad Syndrome

synonyms:
deafness and pili torti, Bjornstad typepili torti and nerve deafness; PTNDpili torti-sensorineural hearing losspili torti-deafness syndromeBS

overview:
Summary
Bjornstad syndrome (BS) is an extremely rare autosomal recessive genetic disorder characterized by abnormally flattened, twisted hair shafts (pili torti) and, in most patients, deafness (congenital sensorineural hearing loss). Hearing loss at birth is variable in severity, but typically affects both ears (bilateral). Individuals with this disorder usually have dry, fragile, lusterless and/or coarse scalp hair as well as areas of patchy hair loss (alopecia).
Introduction
Professor Roar Bjornstad first identified this syndrome in 1965 when he notedpili tortiin eight patients and five of them also had sensorineural deafness. Since then, several other cases have been described, defining the clinical features of the syndrome.

symptoms:
Bjornstad syndrome is characterized by the presence of abnormally flat and twisted hair shafts defined aspili torti. BS patients usually present with dry, fragile, lusterless, and/or coarse scalp hair. When studied under an electron microscope, hair shafts from the scalp appear flattened and/or twisted (torti) at regular intervals. Body hair may exhibit the same characteristic twisting (pili torti) as scalp hair. In some patients, patchy areas of hair loss (alopecia) may be present on the scalp as well as on other areas of the body. However, the eyebrows and eyelashes are typically not affected. Light colored eyes and hair could be associated with BS and some individuals may also experience a lack of sweating (anhidrosis). Most BS patients have deafness due to an impaired ability of the auditory nerves to transmit sensory input to the brain (sensorineural hearing loss).
Hair loss typically begins during the first two years of life and, although severity of symptoms and age of onset are variable, the hair abnormality may become milder with age. Hearing loss typically develops by 3 or 4 years of age and hearing impairment may lead to speech difficulties. Intellectual disability is not a typical feature of the syndrome but has been reported occasionally.
Hypogonadism, characterized by underdevelopment of the ovaries in females and of testes in males, has been described in some BS patients, but this is not typical.

