Bladder Exstrophy-Epispadias-Cloacal Exstrophy Complex

synonyms:
Ectopia Vesicae

overview:
Bladder exstrophy-epispadias-cloacal exstrophy complex is a spectrum of anomalies involving the urinary tract, genital tract, musculoskeletal system and sometimes the intestinal tract. In classic bladder exstrophy, most anomalies are related to defects of the abdominal wall, bladder, genitalia, pelvic bones, rectum and anus.
Bladder exstrophy is a rare developmental abnormality that is present at birth (congenital) in which the bladder and related structures are turned inside out. The rear portion of the bladder wall (posterior vesical wall) turns outward (exstrophy) through an opening in the abdominal wall and urine is excreted through this opening. The extent of the exstrophy depends on how large the opening is. The mildest form is when there is a defect or opening in the tube that carries urine out of the body from the bladder (urethra) and is termed epispadias.
The most severe form is when there is a defect in the urethra, bladder and bowel (cloacal exstrophy).  Classic bladder exstrophy is when there is a defect in the urethra and bladder and is intermediate in severity.  The underlying cause of this complex is not known. The physical characteristics are the result of a developmental abnormality during embryonic growth in which the cloacal membrane is not replaced by tissue that will form the abdominal muscles.

symptoms:
The bladder-exstrophy-epispadias-cloacal exstrophy complex can take many forms depending on the extent of the developmental abnormality that causes it.  The mildest form is when there is an opening in the urethra (epispadias).  The most severe form is when there is an opening in the urethra, bladder and bowel (cloacal exstrophy).
The most common form is classic bladder exstrophy in which the bladder and related structures are turned inside out through an opening in the abdominal wall.  Classic bladder exstrophy is intermediate in severity and the bladder is open from the top of the bladder through the urethra and to the tip of the penis.
Boys with epispadias have a urethra that is extremely short and split and the opening is on the upper surface of the penis.  Girls with epispadias have a urethral opening located between a split clitoris and labia minor.
Cloacal exstrophy is a severe birth defect in which there is usually a membrane-covered area on the abdominal wall that contains the abdominal contents (omphalocele).  The bladder is divided in two halves and males have a penis split in two halves.  Females have a clitoris divided in two halves and may have two vaginal openings.  The opening of the rectum to the outside of the body is usually missing or abnormally small.
Other abnormalities are sometimes associated with the complex.  These include a separation of the pubic bones, absence of the lower portion of the bladder causing lack of bladder control (incontinence) and abnormal position of the tubes that carry urine from the kidneys to the bladder (ureters) causing back up of urine in the kidneys (reflux),

