Blastomycosis

synonyms:
Gilchrist's DiseaseNorth American Blastomycosis

overview:
Blastomycosis is a rare infectious multisystem disease that is caused by the fungus Blastomyces dermatitidis. The symptoms vary greatly according the affected organ system. It is characterized by fever, chills, cough, and/or difficulty breathing (dyspnea). In the chronic phase of the disease, the lungs and skin are most frequently affected. The genitourinary tract and bones may also be involved.

symptoms:
Blastomycosis is an infectious disease characterized by fever, chills, headaches, chest pain, weight loss, night sweats, cough, and/or difficulty breathing (dyspnea).  Some affected individuals do not experience these symptoms although they are actively infected (asymptomatic).  Muscle and joint pain may occur during the acute stage which typically lasts less than three weeks.  The disease may resolve on its own or persist into the chronic form of the infection.  Chronic Blastomycosis, which lasts more than three weeks, may affect the lungs, skin, bones, joints, genitourinary tract, and/or central nervous system.
Involvement of the skin is very common in individuals with Blastomycosis.  Wart-like (verrucous) and small raised pus-filled (papulopustular) lesions are common.  They may be violet colored and have very small abscesses around the borders of the lesions.  Nodular lesions may be present under the skin (subcutaneous) and are usually accompanied by active fungal infection of the lungs.
When Blastomycosis affects the lungs, which are common sites of fungal involvement, it usually takes the form of chronic pneumonia.  Symptoms may include a cough ccompanied by thick sputum, chest pain, difficulty breathing, and/or rapid heartbeat.  In some severe cases of Blastomycosis, Respiratory Distress Syndrome may develop, characterized by excessive deep and rapid breathing (hyperventilation) and insufficient levels of oxygen in the circulating blood (hypoxemia).  Affected individuals typically require mechanical ventilation to assist breathing.  (For more information on this disorder, choose “Respiratory Distress” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
Blastomycosis may also affect the bones and cause lesions that destroy bone tissue (osteolytic).  The ribs, vertebrae of the spine, and the long bones of the arms and legs are most frequently involved.  In many cases these lesions are painless but may develop an overlying abscess.
Involvement of the urogenital tract is common in males with Blastomycosis.  In about 30 percent of cases, the prostate gland and the tubes that carry sperm from the testes (epididymis) are infected by the fungus.  Symptoms may include inflammation, swelling, and/or pain in the groin.  Involvement of the central nervous system, liver, spleen, gastrointestinal tract, thyroid, adrenal glands, and other organs has also been reported in chronic cases of Blastomycosis.

