Bloom Syndrome

synonyms:
Bloom’s syndromeBloom-Torre-Machacek syndromeBSyn

overview:
Bloom syndrome (BSyn) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by short stature; a sun-sensitive, red rash that occurs primarily over the nose and cheeks; mild immune deficiency with increased susceptibility to infections; insulin resistance that resembles type 2 diabetes; and most importantly, a markedly increased susceptibility to many types of cancer, especially leukemia, lymphoma and colorectal tumors. Diagnosis typically involves identification of the characteristic clinical features and/or molecular testing to identify changes (variants) in theBLMgene. BSyn is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, meaning that it occurs when a person inherits two disease-causing variants in theBLMgene. Because the most commonBLMvariant is present at a high frequency in the Eastern European Jewish (Ashkenazi) population, it is often included among the Jewish genetic diseases. The genetic abnormality in Bloom syndrome causes problems with DNA repair, resulting in a high number of chromosome breaks and rearrangements. The abnormal DNA repair is responsible for the increased risk for cancer.

symptoms:
The most consistent clinical feature of BSyn, seen throughout all stages of life, is poor growth that affects height, weight and head circumference. This growth deficiency begins before birth, and the affected fetus is typically smaller than normal for gestational age. Body proportions are normal. The average adult height of affected males and females is below normal and the average head circumference was below normal at all ages in a study of 136 Bsyn patients.
The facial appearance of people with BSyn is variable and may be undistinguishable from unaffected persons of similar age and size, but infants and adults with Bloom syndrome usually have a narrow appearing head and face. Sparse subcutaneous fat may cause the nose and/or ears to appear prominent. Despite their small head circumference, most affected individuals have normal intellectual ability. Feeding difficulties are commonly reported in newborns, infants and young children with BSyn. The child with BSyn characteristically feeds slowly, has a decreased appetite and eats a limited variety of foods. Some infants have had feeding tubes placed. Despite these interventions, weight gain continues to be modest and children are rarely in the normal range for growth, even though their growth hormone levels are normal. Gastroesophageal reflux is common and may contribute to feeding issues.
Skin lesions are another hallmark of BSyn. Although the skin at birth and in infancy appears normal, a red rash later appears on the nose and cheeks in a butterfly shape, and sometimes on the hands and forearms due to the dilation of small blood vessels called telangiectasia. The skin is highly sensitive to sunlight (photosensitive) and this rash often occurs for the first time following sun exposure in the first or second year of life. Areas of abnormal brown or gray skin coloration (cafe-au-lait spots) may occur on other parts of the body.
Males with Bloom syndrome are unable to produce normal amounts of sperm and are usually sterile. There has been one confirmed case of a male with BSyn fathering a child. Female infertility may also occur because menstruation ceases at an abnormally early age among females with Bloom syndrome. However, eleven females in the Bloom Syndrome Registry have become pregnant at least once, seven of whom have delivered a total of eleven healthy babies of normal size.
Many people with BSyn show signs of immune deficiency. As a result, they can experience recurrent infections, primarily ear infections and respiratory infections. Although infections appear to be more common in people with Bloom syndrome, these infections are not life threatening and usually respond to standard antibiotic treatment.  People with Bloom syndrome can also have endocrine abnormalities, and about 17% of patients in the Bloom Syndrome Registry have developed diabetes. Hypothyroidism, a condition that occurs when the thyroid gland does not make enough thyroid hormone (which is important for metabolism, growth and other bodily functions) has been reported in  people with Bloom syndrome as well.
By age 40, a little over 80% of people with Bloom syndrome develop at least one of a variety of cancers, especially leukemia or lymphoma. The types and locations of cancer are similar though not identical to those seen in the general population, but cancer occurs more frequently and at earlier ages in people with BSyn. Of the 294 persons in the Bloom Syndrome Registry, 155 individuals (53%) have developed a total of 251 cancers. Solid tumors account for 66.9% of all cancers, compared to 33.1% with leukemia/lymphoma. Among solid tumors, colorectal cancer is most common at 30 cases to date, followed by skin cancer (29 cases), then breast and oropharyngeal cancers (29 and 28 cases respectively). One-third of the people who have developed cancer develop multiple cancers.
People with Bloom syndrome appear to have 150-300 times the risk of developing cancerous growths as do people without this condition. Most people with Bloom syndrome are likely to develop cancer over their lifetime.

