Bohring-Opitz Syndrome

synonyms:
Oberklaid-Danks syndromeBOS

overview:
Summary
Bohring-Opitz syndrome (BOS) is a rare genetic disorder that is usually noticeable at birth. It affects an individual’s growth, development and multiple organ systems. People with BOS often have severe growth restrictions, making them quite small. They may have feeding difficulties, distinctive facial features and a red or pink birthmark (nevus flammeus) on their forehead or eyelids, as well as seizures and heart anomalies. A characteristic sign of this condition is known as ‘BOS posture’ where the elbows are bent and wrists angle outwards. Other possible issues include a smaller than average head size (microcephaly), a visible ridge over the forehead (metopic ridge), cleft lip and/or palate, eye abnormalities, recurrent infections and sleep apnea, as well as sleep difficulties. Children with BOS often have severe learning differences, and most do not develop typical speech or walking abilities.
Bohring-Opitz syndrome is caused by changes (variants) in theASXL1gene. BOS can theoretically be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner (where there is a 50% chance for each child to inherit the gene variant), but most people with BOS do not reproduce due to developmental and neurological impairments. No cases of anASXL1gene variant being passed from parent to child have been reported; all known cases are caused by new (de novo) variants in the affected person.
There are no specific medications or therapies for BOS, but supportive treatments such as physical, occupational and speech therapy, along with managing individual symptoms, are the standard of care. Based on a review of reported case series and case reports, some people with BOS have been able to walk with walkers or braces, but most are unable to walk independently.
Introduction
BOS was first described in 1999 by Bohring and colleagues. Variants in theASXL1gene were identified in individuals with BOS features and reported in 2011.
BOS and other conditions caused by variants inASXLgenes can be classified under chromatin modifying disorders (CMD), also called Mendelian disorders of the epigenetic machinery. Variants in these genes affect proteins responsible for chromatin regulation. Chromatin is a mix of DNA and proteins that package DNA into the cell structures called chromosomes.
There are threeASXLgenes (ASXL1, ASXL2, ASXL3) and all of them play a critical role in embryonic development. The exact mechanism of action of disease in theASXL– related disorders remains under investigation.

symptoms:
Signs and symptoms in people affected with BOS are usually present at birth, although not all signs may be immediately apparent. Symptoms can include:
Poor growth before birth (intrauterine growth restriction)Brain abnormalities that may be detected on prenatal ultrasound such as:Agenesis of the corpus callosum (the structure that joins the two cerebral hemispheres)Enlarged brain cavities (ventricles)Dandy-Walker malformation where several parts of the cerebellum, the part of the brain that coordinates movement, develop abnormally and are malformedFeeding problems:Babies and young children often have feeding issues that may require a feeding tube (G-tube or gastrostomy tube)Babies may have cyclic vomiting, gastroesophageal reflux or oral aversionFeeding issues may improve or resolve as children ageCleft lip or cleft in the roof of the mouth (cleft palate) which further complicates feeding and swallowingHeart problems that can affect the structure and rhythm of the heartFrequent and recurrent infectionsLow muscle tone that can worsen the frequent infections due to difficulty clearing secretionsBreathing difficulties–Some children may need a breathing tube (tracheostomy) for severe airway issues or breathing assistance.Sleep problems such as:Difficulties falling or staying asleepSleep apneaEye abnormalities including:Difficulty seeing far away (myopia)Lazy eyes (strabismus)Learning and developmental differences (in all patients) that are often severeDelays in developmental milestones such as rolling, sitting and walking (in most patients)Poor speech (Most children do not develop speech but may use adaptive communication devices.)Difficulty walking (Some people with BOS have been able to walk with walkers or braces, but only a few walk independently.)Increased risk to develop a type of childhood kidney cancer known as Wilms tumorIncreased risk of developing a liver tumor known as hepatoblastoma

