Bosma Arhinia Microphthalmia Syndrome

synonyms:
Gifford-Bosma syndromeBosma syndromeRuprecht Majewski syndromearhinia, choanal atresia, microphthalmia, and hypogonadotropic hypogonadismBAM syndrome

overview:
Summary
Bosma arhinia microphthalmia (BAM) syndrome is an extremely rare genetic disorder that has been reported in fewer than 100 patients worldwide in the past century. It is defined by three major features: 1) complete absence of the nose 2) eye defects and 3) absent sexual maturation. The specific symptoms and severity of the disorder can vary from one person to another. For example, eye problems can range from absent tear ducts (the small tubes that carry tears from the eyes to the nose) to very small eyes with blindness. Males with BAM syndrome may be born with underdeveloped genitals (small penis and/or testes that have not descended properly into the scrotum). If a female with BAM syndrome has problems with her reproductive system, it will only become apparent in the teenage years when she does not develop breasts or have menstrual periods. The nose and eye problems typically require surgery, and the reproductive problems can be treated with hormones (testosterone or estrogen replacement). Despite the severe facial problems, patients typically have normal to above average intelligence and live happy, productive lives. The only known genetic cause of BAM syndrome is a change (variant) in theSMCHD1gene. In most patients, this change occurs spontaneously in the egg or sperm cell and is not inherited from the parents.
Introduction
The complete absence of the nose from birth (congenital arhinia) was first described in the French literature in the 1800’s. A handful of additional patients with congenital arhinia, some with and some without eye defects, were reported in the early to mid-1900’s. Dr. James Bosma, a pediatrician and researcher at the National Institute of Dental Health was the first to observe that these patients frequently had genital and reproductive hormone problems. In his 1981 report, he described two unrelated males (who were first reported by plastic surgeon Dr. George Gifford et al., 1972 with congenital arhinia, eye defects and genital defects (small penis and undescended testes at birth with no spontaneous sexual maturation). Nearly every patient with congenital arhinia has been the first and only one affected in their family. However, there have been several reports of multiple patients within the same family, the first by Klaus Ruprecht and Frank Majewski (1978) describing two German sisters with congenital arhinia and eye defects. Several terms have been used in the past for this syndrome to acknowledge the work of Drs. Gifford, Bosma, Ruprecht and Majewski.

symptoms:
Researchers have been able to delineate a recognizable syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, but much about this disorder is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified cases, the lack of large clinical studies and other factors have prevented physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below or may have symptoms that are not discussed. Every patient is unique, and the disorder can be different in one child when compared to another. Parents should talk to their child’s physicians and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
Children with BAM syndrome are born with a very small (hypoplastic) nose or no nose at all. They cannot smell because they are also missing the internal parts of the smell (olfactory) system, but they may be able to detect very strong, irritating odors. Babies who are born without a nose often have trouble breathing because it takes some time for them to learn how to breathe through their mouth and how to breathe and eat at the same time. Some, but not all, babies need oxygen and a breathing tube (oral airway or tracheostomy), at least temporarily. If the back part of the nasal airway is narrow or blocked (choanal atresia), this may also cause breathing problems which can be corrected with surgery. Babies who aren’t growing well may need a feeding tube (gastrostomy or G-tube). Plastic surgeons can help to build an external nose.
Children with BAM syndrome may have problems with vision and their eyes. This includes missing eyes (anophthalmia), abnormally small eyes (microphthalmia), coloboma, cataracts and absent or narrow tear ducts. In a study of nearly 40 patients with BAM syndrome, 77% of patients had anophthalmia or microphthalmia, 79% had coloboma, 53% had cataracts and nearly all had missing or narrow tear ducts. Six patients had no vision problems. There can be loss of vision with age.
A coloboma is a cleft in or failure to close the eyeball during fetal development. This can result in a keyhole-shaped pupil (iris coloboma) and/or abnormalities in the retina, macula or optic nerve. Coloboma of the retina or optic nerve may cause vision loss, including blind spots, problems with depth perception or legal blindness. Many children with coloboma are sensitive to bright light. They may experience retinal detachment over time.A cataract is a clouding of the lens of the eye (which is normally clear) at birth. Cataracts can cause poor vision, but eye doctors can do surgery to fix them.Tear ducts normally drain tears from the eyes to the nose. If tear ducts are absent, patients may have excessive tearing. If tear ducts are narrow, bacteria may collect in them, causing infections. Tear ducts can be opened with surgery.
Other common facial problems include cleft lip or cleft palate, abnormal external ears (too large or too small) and crowded or missing teeth.
It is very common for affected children to have genital abnormalities and/or an inability to make sex hormones. This is most likely because a part of the brain, called the hypothalamus, does not make the hormone GnRH (gonadotropin-releasing hormone). This hormone is required for the reproductive system to develop and function normally. Most boys have a small penis and undescended testes (cryptorchidism). Most boys and girls require hormone therapy to go through puberty. A pediatric endocrinologist can help with this treatment.

