Botulism

overview:
Botulism is a rare but serious paralytic illness caused by a toxin usually produced by the bacteriumClostridium botulinum. There are four generally recognized naturally occurring types; foodborne, wound, infant, and, rarely, adult intestinal colonization. Iatrogenic and inhalational botulism may also occur. Foodborne botulism is caused by eating foods that contain botulinum toxin. Wound botulism occurs whenC. botulinumspores germinate and produce toxin in a contaminated wound or abscess. The most common form of botulism in the United States, infant botulism, is caused when ingestedC. botulinumspores colonize and subsequently produce toxin in the intestines of affected infants. In rare instances,C. botulinumintestinal colonization and toxin production have also occurred among adults with anatomical or functional bowel abnormalities. Additionally, iatrogenic botulism has infrequently occurred after intramuscular injection of botulinum toxin for treatment of certain dystonias and other disorders. Finally, inhalational botulism, though not naturally occurring, was reported among three German laboratory workers who inadvertently inhaled aerosolized toxin and could potentially occur after a deliberate aerosolization of toxin in a bioterrorism event. Any case of foodborne or unexplained botulism is considered to be a public health emergency because of the potential for toxin-containing foods to injure others who eat them and because of the potential misuse of botulinum toxin as a biological weapon. State and local public health officials by law must be informed immediately whenever botulism is suspected in a human patient.

symptoms:
The incubation period for foodborne botulism is usually 12 – 36 hours but may range from a few hours to 10 days. Symptom onset might occur faster in an inhalational botulism scenario. Symptoms can range from mild to severe. The classic medical triad of botulism is a weakness or paralysis and reduced muscle tone in a patient without fever (afebrile) and with a clear sensorium (alert and able to respond to questions). Fever might occur after a secondary infection (e.g., aspiration pneumonia).
The progression of illness is similar among patients with different types of botulism (foodborne, wound, inhalational) except that foodborne botulism patients often experience gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea that precede the onset of neurologic illness.
The typical neurologic presentation of botulism is a symmetric (same on both sides of the body), descending flaccid paralysis that begins in the nerves that control the muscles in the face, head, and neck (cranial nerves) and progresses to include proximal muscle groups such as hip and shoulder muscles and then distal extremity muscle groups such as muscles of wrists, hands, and feet. Severe illness can result in respiratory paralysis and death. Some patients also experience abdominal pain or cramping, constipation or ileus (paralytic obstruction of the intestines), and urinary retention. Sensory deficits or paresthesias are uncommon but can occur, and mental status typically remains clear provided the patient is adequately oxygenated.
Cranial nerve deficits are usually bilateral and typically precede respiratory impairment or extremity weakness. Eye signs or symptoms may include double vision (diplopia) and/or blurred vision, impaired functioning of the muscles of the eyes (ophthalmoplegia), droopy eyelids (ptosis), dilation of the pupil (mydriasis), and depressed or loss of pupillary constriction to light. Other findings may include difficulty speaking (dysphonia) or slurred speech (dysarthria), difficulty in swallowing (dysphagia), a dry mouth and very dry or sore throat. Some individuals have a tongue that appears swollen or “coated” due to its dryness. The gag reflex may be suppressed.
Affected individuals may experience generalized muscle weakness, often progressing rapidly from the head to involve the neck, arms, chest, and legs. The weakness is usually the same on both sides of the body (symmetric), descending, and spreads from proximal to distal muscle groups. Weakening of the deep tendon reflexes (hyporeflexia) or complete loss of reflexes (areflexia) may also be present. Difficulty breathing may also be present and may progress to respiratory failure from pharyngeal and upper airway muscle paralysis as well as paralysis of the diaphragm and accessory muscles of respiration.
Wound botulism is characterized by the same neurological symptoms as foodborne botulism. However, the affected individual typically experiences no gastrointestinal symptoms, and no food can be implicated as the cause. The skin must be carefully checked for wounds. In the United States, wound botulism most commonly occurs among users of injection drugs, particularly black tar heroin and has most frequently been reported in western US states. Wound botulism may rarely occur after traumatic injury involving contamination with soil, or potentially after surgery. A fever due to infection from other bacteria may be present.
Infant botulism generally affects infants under 12 months of age. The action of the toxin in the body produces constipation, weakness (notably of gag, cry, suck, and swallow), loss of muscle tone, and ultimately, limp (flaccid) paralysis. The severity and rapidity of onset of the disease varies greatly among affected infants. In the absence of complications, recovery is complete.

