Branchiootorenal Spectrum Disorders

synonyms:
branchiootorenal (BOR) syndromebranchiootic (BOS) syndrome

overview:
Summary
Branchiootorenal spectrum disorders are inherited as autosomal dominant genetic conditions that can vary greatly from one person to another, even in members of the same family.
Branchiootorenal (BOR) syndrome is characterized by pits or ear tags in front of the outer ear (preauricular pits), abnormal passages from the throat to the outside surface of the neck (branchial fistulas), branchial cysts, malformations of the outer, middle and inner ear, hearing loss and kidney (renal) abnormalities.
Individuals with branchiootic (BOS) syndrome have the ear and hearing abnormalities but kidneys are not affected.

symptoms:
Most people with BOR/BOS syndrome have some type of hearing loss. The hearing loss may be due to nerve damage (sensory), blockage of sound waves (conductive), or both. The degree of hearing loss varies from mild to profound, and can differ between the two ears. The deafness can be stable or progressive. Other abnormalities related to the ear that may be present include pits or outgrowths of cartilage (tags) in front of the outer ear; a cupped or small outer ear; and/or a narrow or upward slanted outer ear canal.
An abnormal passage from the throat to the outside surface of the neck (branchial fistula), and/or an opening on the side of the neck, or a mass that can be felt under the muscles on the side of the neck is often present.
The kidney abnormalities associated with BOR syndrome range from mild to very severe. In milder cases, the kidney may be unusually shaped. In more severe cases, there may be duplication of the collecting system of the kidneys and/or absence or failure of one or both of the kidneys to form.
Other abnormalities that have been found in association with BOR syndrome are narrowing of the tear duct in the eyes interfering with the normal flow of tears; a long narrow face; cleft palate; paralysis of certain muscles in the face; and/or a deep overbite.

