Branchio Oculo Facial Syndrome

synonyms:
BOFSbranchio-oculo-facial syndrome, also branchiooculofacial syndromehemangiomatous branchial clefts-lip pseudocleft syndrome

overview:
Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS) is a rare genetic disorder with defects of the head and neck that are apparent at birth (congenital) and usually diagnosed in childhood. As of 2018, fewer than 100 cases have been reported in the medical literature, although additional patients are probably followed world-wide.
The diagnosis of BOFS is based on recognition of the distinctive craniofacial features. “B” refers to branchial skin defects, although a more accurate term is pharyngeal. “O” refers to various ocular (eye) anomalies. “F” refers to the various facial differences including cleft lip/palate, unusual nose, malformed nose and small teeth. Problems outside of the head and neck region include kidney defects and congenital heart defect.
Additional features include low birth weight, growth delay, learning challenges, intellectual disability and mental health issues. However, detailed studies of the neuropsychologic issues have not been performed to determine a reliable frequency.
Symptoms may vary from mild to severe forms. The sole pathogenic gene isTFAP2A.  Although molecular genetic testing is useful to confirm the clinical diagnosis, the classic phenotype should not be confused with other syndromes.
The disorder is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern and many parent/child families are known, even if not reported in medical articles.

symptoms:
Infants with BOFS may have a low birth weight and may continue to experience abnormally slow growth after birth (postnatal growth retardation).
“B” refers to “branchial” skin defects, although a more accurate term is pharyngeal. The skin defects are not true hemangiomas, but unfortunately, the description as hemangiomatous has persisted. They are usually dark pink or red, may be moist, weep, or have atrophic skin. They vary in size from small defects as small as a “pit” to larger lesions which require resection and reconstructive surgery. They should not be treated with simple cauterization. Many are linear along both sides of the neck. Less commonly, they occur below or behind the ear.
“O” refers to various ocular (eye) anomalies especially microphthalmia (small eyes), ptosis, strabismus, and cataracts. Blockage of the tear ducts (lacrimal duct obstruction) is common. The eyes are typically widely spaced.
“F” refers to individual facial defects, which together create the impression of a recognizable facial appearance.  The oral cleft can be incomplete or partial, the so-called pseudocleft lip. The philtrum is unusually wide and a ridge gives the impression it had been surgically repaired, or “healed” in utero. There is often a severe bilateral cleft lip and palate. Teeth can be small, absent or malformed. The nose is malformed with a broad bridge and flattened tip. The ears are malformed, typically low-set and posteriorly rotated. Hair may be prematurely grey. Facial asymmetry due to lower facial nerve weakness can be present.
Anomalies of the thymus, ranging from absence to atypical position, occur. Skin features include subcutaneous cysts of the scalp and elsewhere. In addition to the structural differences, there can be visual impairment, hearing loss and speech disabilities. Autism spectrum disorder, congenital heart defects, and polydactyly are rare. Although cognitive ability is usually normal, there is no large study of subtler learning and behavior challenges.

