Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia

synonyms:
BPDchronic lung disease, respiratory outcomes after premature birth

overview:
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) is a chronic respiratory disease that most often occurs in low-birthweight or premature infants who have received supplemental oxygen or have spent long periods of time on a breathing machine (mechanical ventilation), such as infants who have acute respiratory distress syndrome. BPD can also occur in older infants who experience abnormal lung development or some infants that have had an infection before birth (antenatal infection) or placental abnormalities (such as preeclampsia). Antenatal steroid treatment prior to preterm birth and early treatment with surfactant have reduced the need for high levels of respiratory support after birth.
Affected infants may have rapid, labored breathing and bluish discoloration of the skin due to low levels of oxygen in the blood (cyanosis). Infants are not born with BPD and the condition results from damage to the lungs due to the extremely fragile nature of the underdeveloped, immature lungs. Although most infants fully recover from BPD, some have sustained abnormalities of lung function and structure throughout adolescence and into adulthood. However, the condition can cause serious complications during infancy and often requires hospitalization and intensive medical care, especially during the first 2 years after birth.
The survival of low-birth-weight infants has improved steadily over the past few decades. Many infants diagnosed with BPD today are born at far earlier gestational ages than in the past. Researchers think that these cases of BPD are less associated with injury and repair to the lungs and more likely represent an underlying disruption or abnormality affecting the development of the lungs. These infants may require chronic oxygen supplementation even without developing acute respiratory distress syndrome. These cases are sometimes referred to as “new” BPD.

symptoms:
Some infants who develop BPD have a condition called respiratory distress syndrome (RSD), which is a breathing disorder that affects some premature infants immediately after birth. It is characterized by rapid, shallow breathing and leads to the need for oxygen and respiratory support in the first days of life. Affected infants may also exhibit fast breathing with signs of shortness of breath, a chronic cough or wheezing, flaring of the nostrils when breathing and bluish discoloration of the skin due to low levels of oxygen in the blood (cyanosis). Some infants may grunt when breathing out (exhaling). Additional symptoms may include abnormally fast breathing (tachypnea), wheezing or a “crackling” or “rattling” sound that is heard in the lungs when inhaling.
Most infants with BPD recover fully and damage to the lungs progressively improves with growth. In a few rare cases, BPD can cause life-threatening complications during infancy such as high blood pressure of the main artery of the lungs (pulmonary hypertension) and failure of the right side of the heart (cor pulmonale).
As affected infants and children grow, they may be at a greater risk than the general population of developing asthma, respiratory infections or viral pneumonia.

