Budd Chiari Syndrome

synonyms:
Budd's SyndromeChiari-Budd SyndromeChiari's DiseaseHepatic Veno-Occlusive DiseaseRokitansky's Disease

overview:
Budd-Chiari syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by narrowing and obstruction (occlusion) of the veins of the liver (hepatic veins). Symptoms associated with Budd Chiari syndrome include pain in the upper right part of the abdomen, an abnormally large liver (hepatomegaly), and/or accumulation of fluid in the space (peritoneal cavity) between the two layers of the membrane that lines the stomach (ascites). Additional findings that may be associated with the disorder include nausea, vomiting, and/or an abnormally large spleen (splenomegaly). The severity of the disorder varies from case to case, depending upon the site and number of affected veins. In some cases, if the major hepatic veins are involved, high blood pressure in the veins carrying blood from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract back to the heart through the liver (portal hypertension) may be present. In most cases, the exact cause of Budd-Chiari syndrome is unknown.

symptoms:
Budd-Chiari syndrome involves obstruction or narrowing (occlusion) of the outflowing veins from either large regions of the liver or the entire liver. Blood clots or congenital webbing occur at the junction of these vessels with the large vein that carries the blood from the lower part of the body (inferior vena cava) to the right upper chamber (atrium) of the heart. This syndrome may begin gradually or abruptly.
Symptoms associated with Budd-Chiari syndrome include pain in the upper right part of the abdomen, an abnormally enlarged liver (hepatomegaly), yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes (jaundice), and/or accumulation of fluid in the space (peritoneal cavity) between the two layers of the membrane that lines the stomach (ascites). In some cases, there may be increased blood pressure in the veins carrying blood from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract back to the heart through the liver (portal hypertension). In some cases, impaired liver function may also develop. Liver biopsy tests show central cell deterioration, development of fibrous growths and blockage (occlusion) of the terminal liver veins. When vein blockage is severe, onset of the disorder can be sudden, and may be accompanied by severe pain. If the disease is chronic, onset may be gradual. In some cases, there may also be unusual swelling due to abnormal accumulation of fluid (edema) within the tissues of the legs.
In some cases, affected individuals may have scarring (fibrosis) and impaired functioning of the liver (cirrhosis) before or following the development of Budd-Chiari syndrome.

