Buerger’s Disease

synonyms:
Inflammatory Occlusive Peripheral Vascular DiseaseOcclusive Peripheral Vascular DiseaseTAOThromboangiitis Obliterans

overview:
Buerger’s disease, also known as thromboangiitis obliterans, is a rare disorder that, in most cases, affects young or middle-aged male cigarette smokers. It is characterized by narrowing or blockage (occlusion) of the veins and arteries of the extremities, resulting in reduced blood flow to these areas (peripheral vascular disease). The legs are affected more often than the arms. In most cases, the first symptom is extreme pain of the lower arms and legs while at rest. Affected individuals may also experience cramping in the legs when they walk that, in rare cases, may cause limping (claudication). In addition, affected individuals may have sores (ulcers) on the extremities, numbness and tingling and a lack of normal blood flow to the fingers and/or toes when exposed to cold temperatures (Raynaud’s phenomenon), and/or inflammation and clotting of certain veins (thrombophlebitis). In severe cases, individuals with Buerger’s disease may exhibit tissue death (gangrene) of affected limbs. The exact cause of Buerger’s disease is not known; however, most affected individuals are heavy tobacco users.

symptoms:
Buerger’s disease is characterized by narrowing or blockage (occlusion) of the intermediate and/or small sized arteries and veins of the extremities, resulting in reduced blood flow to these areas (peripheral vascular disease). Buerger’s disease tends to occur in sudden (acute) episodes that may last from one to four weeks. The disorder runs a recurrent course.
In most cases, the first sign of Buerger’s disease is extreme pain in the lower arms and/or legs while at rest. Affected individuals may also experience cramping in the legs when they walk that, in rare cases, may cause affected individuals to limp (claudication). Other physical features associated with Buerger’s disease may include sores (ulcers) on the arms and legs, pale discoloration of the hands, numbness and tingling and a lack of normal blood flow to the fingers and/or toes when exposed to cold temperatures (Raynaud’s phenomenon), and inflammation and clotting of certain veins (thrombophlebitis).  Dry dark ulcerations that often form on the tips of the fingers or toes may be extremely painful. Pain associated with these ulcers may worsen with elevation.  In severe cases, individuals with Buerger’s disease may exhibit tissue death (gangrene) of the affected areas.
In some cases, arteries and veins of the intestines may also be affected.  This may result in extreme heaviness or pain (angina) in the abdomen and weight loss. In extremely rare cases (i.e., fewer than 2 percent), affected individuals have exhibited neurological abnormalities.

