Börjeson-Forssman-Lehman Syndrome

synonyms:
BFLSBORJBorjeson syndrome

overview:
Börjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syndrome (BFLS) is an extremely rare disorder characterized by intellectual disability, obesity, seizures, failure of the testes in males or the ovaries in females to produce hormones (hypogonadism), and distinctive facial features. Affected infants often experience delays in reaching developmental milestones. The exact symptoms vary from case to case, even among members of the same family. BFLS is caused by disruptions or changes (mutations) of thePHF6gene on the X chromosome. This mutation is usually transmitted as an X-linked recessive trait, which means the disorder is fully expressed predominantly in males. Females who carry a single copy of the disease gene (heterozygous carriers) may develop some variable features of the disorder, however, in some instances they can have features similar to the affected males (i.e. be considered as affected with the syndrome).

symptoms:
Börjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syndrome has been considered to be fully expressed only in males given the X-chromosome localization of the responsible gene (see below). However, there have been several reports of affected females with the syndrome. Generally, the symptoms of females vary dramatically, from no clinical presentations to fully affected status. The symptoms associated with BFLS are variable even in males and even in individuals of the same family.
Most males affected by BFLS are characterized by mental retardation of varying severity. Affected infants may also have diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), a smaller head circumference than would be expected for an infant’s age and sex (microcephaly), and may experience feeding difficulties resulting in failure to thrive. As affected children age they may experience delays in reaching developmental milestones. Seizures may be present in some cases. Mild obesity is common in affected children even during infancy.
Affected individuals may have distinctive facial features including large, fleshy earlobes, deep-set eyes, heavy ridges above the eyes (prominent supraorbital ridge), and thickened connective tissue of the face, giving the face a coarse appearance. In some cases, affected individuals may have droopy upper eyelids (ptosis), rapid, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus), and abnormalities of the thin membrane that lines the back of the eyes (retina) and the main nerve that sends electrical impulses from the retina to the brain (optic nerve). Vision problems such as farsightedness (hyperopia) and cataracts may develop before the age of 30.
Individuals with BFLS may also have reduced function of the testes or ovaries (hypogonadism). The failure of the testes and ovaries to produces hormones may result in growth deficiencies resulting in short stature and delayed sexual development. In addition, affected males may have small genitalia and the testes may fail to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism). After puberty, some males may develop abnormally enlarged breasts (gynecomastia).
Skeletal abnormalities may occur in some cases including abnormal side-to-side or front-to-back curvature of the spine (scoliosis or kyphosis), a narrow cervical spinal canal, or underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of certain bones of the fingers or toes resulting long, tapered fingers and abnormally short toes especially the fourth and fifth toes.
As affected males age, the symptoms of the disorder may become milder and vary more between cases. Diabetes has occurred in some adults with BFLS.
Females who carry the disease gene for BFLS were considered to be much less severely affected and develop only some symptoms of the disorder, generally a milder form of BFLS seen in the affected males. However, this assumption was based on females from larger families with primarily affected men. With the advent of new DNA sequencing technologies many singleton patients are tested and with those it has recently been revealed thatde novomutations (not present in the parents of the child) in PHF6 in singleton females result in a specific clinical phenotype, which might have been under-recognized so far. These female patients are affected with variable level of intellectual disability, characteristic facial features, underdeveloped nails, some dental anomalies, sparse hair and linear skin hyperpigmentation. A few females have been reported to develop epilepsy, which may be associated with signs of a generalized neuronal migration disorder resembling a subcortical band heterotopia on MRI. Interestingly while this female clinical phenotype shows overlap with BFLS, it also includes additional clinical features, thus adding a new facet to the disorder. These affected females (in particular when young) seem to resemble another genetic syndrome, Coffin-Siris syndrome. Their clinical presentations overlap, but are not identical, with typical BFLS phenotype only later in life, ie. in adolescence and adult life.

