C Syndrome

synonyms:
Opitz trigonocephaly syndrometrigonocephaly C syndrometrigonocephaly syndromeOTCS

overview:
Summary
C syndrome, also known as Opitz trigonocephaly syndrome (OTCS), is a complex condition defined by a broad group of clinical features and abnormalities. Children may be given this preliminary diagnosis and later diagnosed with a specific genetic condition.    Affected children are born with a malformation in which the head is a triangular shape due to premature union of the skull bones (trigonocephaly), a narrow pointed forehead, a flat broad nasal bridge with a short nose, vertical folds over the inner corners of the eyes, an abnormal palate that is deeply furrowed, abnormalities of the ear, crossed eyes (strabismus), joints that are bent or in a fixed position, and loose skin. Developmental and learning disabilities are common. These signs and symptoms can vary significantly from one patient to another.
OTCS is a heterogeneous disorder, which means that it does not have a single cause. Changes (mutations) in multiple and distinct genes, combinations of genes and chromosomal abnormalities may be the underlying cause this condition.
Introduction
In 1969, John Marius Opitz, a German-American medical geneticist, was treating two siblings, one brother and one sister. He noticed similar features: trigonocephaly, facial dysmorphia and severe mental delay. The syndrome was first named “C syndrome of multiple congenital abnormalities”, where the “C” stood for this family’s surname. Then, it was renamed C syndrome, Opitz C syndrome or Opitz trigonocephaly syndrome.

symptoms:
One of the major features of OTCS is a condition in which the skull is a triangular shape. This occurs due to premature closure of the bones (trigonocephaly or prominent metopic suture due to its premature fusion). Patients with this disorder also have a distinct face in which the nasal bridge is broad with a short nose, there are vertical folds over the inner corners of the eyes (epicanthus) and paralysis of facial muscles (facial palsy). These children may have abnormalities of the outer ear, crossed eyes (strabismus), thin upper lip, smooth vertical groove between the base of the nose and the border of the upper lip (philtrum),an undersized jaw (micrognathia), a short neck and loose skin. Additional characteristics can include abnormalities of the breastbone (sternum), webbed fingers and/or toes (syndactyly), short limbs, heart, pancreas, kidney and lung abnormalities and failure of one or both testicles to move down into the scrotum (cryptorchidism).
Feeding difficulties may occur because of a deeply furrowed palate in the mouth and malposition of teeth. Additional characteristics can include loss of muscle tone and joints in the hands bent in a fixed position or dislocated.
Affected children may have central nervous system malformations and seizures. Developmental delay (motor, mental or global) and speech delay are common and children with C syndrome have intellectual disability that can vary from mild to severe.

