C3 Glomerulopathy Dense Deposit Disease and C3 Glomerulonephritis

synonyms:
C3G

overview:
Over the past decade, important advances in our understanding of complement-mediated renal diseases have led to the adoption of new names or ‘disease categories’ to more precisely group diseases that appear to share a similar cause. Consider, for example, dense deposit disease (DDD), a very rare kidney disease characterized on a renal biopsy test called ‘immunofluorescence’ by an abundance of a protein called C3 in the renal glomeruli and named for the extremely dense ‘sausage-like’ deposits that are seen in the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) using electron microscopy. In 2013, after a consensus meeting, scientists recommended that DDD be sub-grouped under a new heading – C3 Glomerulopathy, abbreviated C3G. The adoption of this new term was driven by the recognition that there is another group of patients with glomerular disease whose kidney biopsy is reminiscent of DDD. On electron microscopy, the deposits in these patients are lighter in color and more widespread in location, but on immunofluorescence, as with DDD there is an abundance of C3 in the renal glomeruli. These patients are said to have C3 glomerulonephritis or C3GN. In recognition of shared similarities, both DDD and C3GN are now classified as sub-types of C3G. C3G, itself, falls under the category of C3 dominant glomerulopathy, which also includes monoclonal gammopathy of renal significance (MGRS) and post-infectious glomerulonephritis (PIGN), two diseases that can mimic C3G but are distinct in their causality, natural history and treatment.
What happens in C3G? The glomeruli are the filtering units of the kidney, where blood gets filtered under pressure through the GBM into another space, called Bowman’s space, as urine. About 1-2 million glomeruli in each kidney do the filtering, creating a filtrate of water, sodium, potassium, chloride, glucose and small proteins. In both DDD and C3GN, deposits of C3 and other proteins in the GBM disrupt kidney function. Progressive damage to the glomeruli occurs and after about 10 years, enough damage has occurred so that about half of all persons with C3G have kidney failure. When kidney failure occurs, dialysis must be started, or transplantation must be performed. The rate of progression to end-stage kidney failure and dialysis appears to be similar for both DDD and C3GN.
In addition to dense deposits in the kidney, persons with DDD can develop deposits in their eyes in an area called Bruch’s membrane. This occurs because the ‘choriocapillaris-Bruch’s membrane-retinal pigment epithelium’ interface in the eye is very similar to the capillary-GBM interface in the kidney. The eye deposits are called drusen. Whether they occur more or less frequently in patients with C3GN is not clear.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of DDD and C3GN are similar. They include blood in the urine, which is called hematuria; dark foamy urine, which signifies the presence of protein or ‘proteinuria’; cloudiness of the urine, reflecting the presence of white blood cells; swelling or ‘edema’, initially of the legs although any part of the body can be affected; high blood pressure; decreased urine output; and decreased alertness.
As mentioned earlier, when a kidney biopsy is done in a person with the above signs and symptoms if C3G (either DDD or C3GN) is suspected, the immunofluorescence analysis must show abundant C3 in the glomerular capillaries. This finding is a requirement and in its absence the diagnosis of C3G can be excluded. Sophisticated studies have been done to determine the precise composition of the electron-dense deposits in DDD and C3GN, and in addition to C3 and its breakdown fragments, glomeruli contain many other proteins that belong to a system called the complement system. Proteins from both the alternative pathway of complement and the terminal pathway of the complement are found. This finding agrees with our understanding of the pathophysiology of DDD and C3GN.
As might be expected, since complement proteins are typically in the blood stream, if they become trapped in the kidneys, blood stream levels will often be correspondingly reduced; and in fact, in persons with both DDD and C3GN several complement proteins in the blood stream circulate at lower-than-expected levels. The most notable is the decrease in C3, which tends to be reduced to a greater extent in persons with DDD as compared to C3GN. Studies are currently being done to measure the levels of many different complement proteins in persons with DDD and C3GN and to compare these levels to persons without any kidney disease to determine whether the ‘profile’ for DDD and C3GN is unique. This technique is called ‘complement biomarker profiling’. This type of information provides clinicians with insight into what is happening at the level of the complement system in their patients with DDD and C3GN and can help to drive treatment decisions.

