Canavan Disease

synonyms:
ASPA deficiencyaspartoacylase deficiencyCanavan's leukodystrophyCanavan-Van Bogaert-Bertrand diseasespongy degeneration of the central nervous systemVan Bogaert-Bertrand syndrome

overview:
Canavan disease is rare genetic neurological disorder characterized by the spongy degeneration of the white matter in the brain. Affected infants may appear normal at birth, but usually develop symptoms between 3-6 months of age. Symptoms may include an abnormally large head (macrocephaly), lack of head control, severely diminished muscle tone resulting in “floppiness,” and delays in reaching developmental milestones such as independent sitting and walking. Most affected children develop life-threatening complications by 10 years of age. Canavan disease occurs because of mutations in the aspartoacylase (ASPA) gene that affects the breakdown (metabolism) of the N-acetylaspartic acid (NNA). It is inherited as an autosomal recessive condition.
Canavan disease belongs to a group of disorders known as the leukodystrophies. The leukodystrophies are a group of rare, progressive, metabolic, genetic disorders that can affect the brain, spinal cord and often the nerves outside the central nervous system (peripheral nerves). Each type of leukodystrophy is caused by an abnormality affecting a specific gene that results in abnormal development of one of at least 10 different chemicals that make up the white matter of the brain. The white matter is tissue composed of nerve fibers. Many of these nerve fibers are covered by a collection of fats (lipids) and proteins known as myelin. Myelin, which collectively may be referred to as the myelin sheath, protects the nerve fibers, acts as an insulator and increases the speed of transmission of nerve signals. Each type of leukodystrophy affects a different part of the myelin sheath, leading a range of different neurological problems.

symptoms:
The symptoms and progression of Canavan disease varies from case to case. The disorder usually becomes apparent between 3 and 6 months of age and the initial symptoms usually include extremely poor head control, an abnormally large head (macrocepahly), and severely diminished muscle tone (hypotonia) resulting in “floppiness.” Affected infants may be generally unresponsive (apathetic), lethargic or irritable. Some infants may experience difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), which contributes to feeding difficulties.
Affected infants also show delays in reaching developmental milestones (e.g., sitting or standing unassisted) and most never walk independently. The progressive loss of abilities requiring the coordination of mental and muscular activity (psychomotor regression) and mental retardation also become apparent during infancy. Most affected infants do learn to smile, laugh, raise their heads and interact socially.
Additional symptoms that affect children with Canavan disease include seizures, sleep disorders, feeding difficulties, nasal regurgitation, backflow of acid from the stomach to the esophagus (reflux) sometimes associated with vomiting, and deterioration of the nerves of the eyes (optic nerves) that transmit impulses from the nerve-rich membrane lining the eyes (retina) to the brain (optic atrophy). Optic atrophy may cause reduced visual responsiveness. In most case, hearing is unaffected, but hearing loss can occur.
As affected infants age, hypotonia may eventually develop into spasticity, a condition characterized by involuntary muscle spasms that result in slow, stiff movements of the legs. Affected individuals may eventually exhibit uncontrolled rigid extensions and rotations of the arms, legs, fingers, and toes (decerebrate rigidity) or paralysis. Canavan disease eventually progresses to cause life-threatening complications; however, the severity and progression of the disease varies. Some individuals develop life-threatening complications in infancy; others live beyond their teen-age years.
In the last few years, a mild form of Canavan disease has been recognized, with characteristic mutations of the ASPA gene and only slightly increased NAA in the urine. These children may be only slightly delayed, can learn and go to school. The head may be somewhat enlarged, but the typical white matter changes associated with Canavan may be absent. The prognosis is certainly much better.

