CARASIL

synonyms:
cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy w/subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathyMaeda syndrome

overview:
Classic CARASIL is a rare genetic disorder that is characterized by damage to the small blood vessels in the brain. Individuals with CARASIL are at risk of developing multiple strokes, even if they do not have cardiovascular risk factors. The symptoms of CARASIL result from damage to various small blood vessels, especially those within the brain. Individuals with CARASIL may develop a variety of symptoms relating to white matter involvement or changes in deep white matter in the brain (leukoaraiosis), which are observed on MRI or CT). Such symptoms include an increasing muscle tone (spasticity), pyramidal signs and pseudobulbar palsy. Pseudobulbar palsy is a group of neurologic symptoms that includes difficulty with chewing, swallowing and speech. Eventually, gait disturbance and dementia may result. About a third of patients have stroke-like episodes. The age of onset is between 20 to 50 years old. CARASIL is an acronym that stands for:
(C)erebral – relating to the brain or the cerebellum, which is part of the brain that controls balance and muscular coordination
(A)utosomal (R)ecessive – a form of inheritance in which two copies (one from each parent) of an abnormal gene is necessary for the development of a disorder
(A)rteriopathy – disease of the small arteries (blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart)
(S)ubcortical – relating to a specific area of the deep brain that is involved in higher functioning (e.g., voluntary movements, reasoning, memory)
(I)nfarcts – tissue loss in the brain caused by lack of oxygen to the brain, which occurs when blood flow in the small arteries is blocked or abnorma.
(L)eukoencephalopathy – destruction of the myelin, an oily substance that covers and protects nerve fibers in the central nervous system
Other characteristics of classic CARASIL include early sparse hair (alopecia) and degenerative changes in the spine (spondylolisthesis). Spondylolisthesis begins between 10 and 30 years, causing back pain and herniated discs in the cervical and lumbar areas. However, patients without these symptoms have also been reported.
Recently, certain changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in theHTRA1gene have been shown to cause cerebral small vessel disease (CSVD) even in people with only one gene variant (heterozygotes) and this is calledHTRA1-related cerebral small vessel disease (or CARASIL 2). These patients have neurologic symptoms and small vessel disease similar to CARASIL, but the onset is often later, and symptoms such as alopecia and spondylolisthesis are not present.

symptoms:
The cerebral symptoms of CARASIL are caused by damage to cerebral small blood vessels. The specific symptoms and severity of the disorder can vary greatly among affected individuals. Onset of the disorder is usually in early adulthood but may range from the early 20s to the mid-40s. CARASIL is often rapidly progressive.
Damage to the small blood vessels of the brain and reduce or cut off blood flow to the brain (stroke). Reduced blood flow to the brain can cause damage to brain tissue, which may cause a variety of different symptoms. Symptoms that may occur in individuals with CARASIL include increasing muscle tone, slurred speech, stiff movements of the legs (spasticity), gait disturbances, loss of bladder control (urinary incontinence) and problems with swallowing Most affected individuals experience progressive brain damage, especially to the white matter, which is the portion of the brain that contains myelinated nerve fibers. Eventually the disorder causes cognitive impairment which may include memory problems, difficulties making decisions or solving problems, speech difficulties, deficits in attention span and general loss of interest (apathy). Continued cognitive decline ultimately results in dementia. Dementia is defined as the progressive loss of memory and decline in intellectual abilities that interferes with performing routine tasks of daily life.
Additional important symptoms that have been associated with CARASIL include sparse hair (alopecia) and degenerative change of the spinal column (spondylosis). Spondylosis begins between 10 to 30 years and causes back pain and a herniated disc in the cervical and the lumbar region. Although alopecia occurs in most cases and develops before the onset of neurological symptoms, some cases without alopecia have been reported.
Individuals with only one pathogenic variant (mutation) in theHTRA1gene can have neurological symptoms and small vessel damage similar to those of CARASIL. However, the onset tends to be later and symptoms such as alopecia and spondylosis are usually not present.

