Carcinoid Syndrome

synonyms:
carcinoid apudomacarcinoid cancercarcinoid diseasefunctioning argentaffinomafunctioning carcinoidmalignant carcinoid syndromeneuroendocrine tumor carcinoid type

overview:
Carcinoid syndrome is a disease consisting of a combination of symptoms, physical manifestations, and abnormal laboratory findings. Carcinoid syndrome is seen in individuals who have an underlying carcinoid tumour with spread to the liver. Carcinoid tumors are well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumours with secretory properties, releasing serotonin, along with a number of other active peptides. These tumors can arise anywhere along the primitive gut and are therefore found in the bronchial tree (airways) and along the gastrointestinal tract. The tumor cells can also migrate (metastasize) to the liver.
Carcinoid tumors most commonly occur in the small intestine and appendix, but 10% originate in the lung. Other affected areas include the rectum, colon, pancreas, stomach, ovary, thymus, kidney, prostate, breast and elsewhere. These slow-growing malignancies tend to spread to lymph nodes and the liver but can also metastasize to lung, bone, brain, and skin.
Only about 10% of the people with a carcinoid tumor will develop carcinoid syndrome. Major symptoms of this syndrome include hot, red facial flushing, diarrhea and wheezing. Carcinoid syndrome occurs when the tumor produces excessive amounts of serotonin in an individual with liver metastases. In patients who have no spread to the liver, the serotonin released by an intestinal tumor will be broken down to an inactive substance; thus, carcinoid syndrome does not occur.

symptoms:
Symptoms may be non-hormonal, secondary to tumor bulk and therefore depend on location; or hormonal as a result of carcinoid syndrome. Those caused by the tumour may include abdominal pain, anemia, pneumonia, cough and haemoptysis (cough productive of blood). Carcinoid tumors can also be present without producing any symptoms and may often go undetected for a long period of time.
The symptoms of carcinoid syndrome include episodes of warmth and redness of the face, head and upper chest; diarrhea; marked changes in blood pressure (usually hypotension, a decrease in blood pressure); asthmatic-like wheezing; weight loss or gain; malnutrition; dehydration; weakness; muscle and joint aching; and peptic ulcer.
In later stages, carcinoid syndrome may damage the heart valves, resulting in symptoms of congestive heart failure. The diarrhea may be so severe that vital nutrients of the body, such as potassium and water, are depleted creating life-threatening electrolyte imbalance. The syndrome may also be accompanied by stomach pain, blockage of the arteries in the liver, heart palpitations and excessive peptide excretion in the urine. In extremely rare cases, the acute occurrence of flushing, blood pressure changes, weakness, palpitations, faintness and wheezing constitutes a carcinoid crisis that can be life-threatening. Not all of these features need be present in a carcinoid crisis or for a diagnosis of carcinoid syndrome.

