CARD9 Deficiency

overview:
Summary
CARD9 deficiency is a rare disorder of the immune system caused by changes (mutations) in the gene calledcaspase recruitment domain family member 9(CARD9). CARD9 deficiency leads to increased susceptibility to certain fungal infections. Generally speaking, the term “fungi” includes two broad categories, yeasts and molds that can be accurately identified in a hospital diagnostic microbiology laboratory. CARD9 deficiency can render affected individuals susceptible particularly to the yeast called Candida (causing “candidiasis”), as well as to certain types of molds (those called “dermatophytes”, which usually cause infections like “ringworm” and “athlete’s foot”, as well as those called “black molds” or “pheohyphomycetes”). However, current knowledge suggests that people with CARD9 deficiency are at increased risk for disease with only one of these types of fungus. As well, people with CARD9 deficiency do not seem to be at increased risk for infections caused by other microbes, such as bacteria, viruses, or parasites.
Introduction
CARD9 deficiency is a type of primary immunodeficiency. Primary immunodeficiency diseases (also called “inborn errors of immunity”) are a group of more than 420 rare, chronic disorders in which part of the body’s immune system is missing or functions improperly. These diseases are caused by a mutation in a gene or genes, and, although some disorders present at birth or in early childhood, the disorders can affect anyone, regardless of age or gender. Some affect a single part of the immune system; others may affect one or more components of the system.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms (or manifestations) of CARD9 deficiency appear quite varied.
As mentioned above, some persons develop infection only with Candida, while others develop infection only with dermatophytes, and others develop infection only with “black molds”.
The following conditions can be caused by CARD9 deficiency:• invasive fungal disease• mycosis• Candida infection (candidiasis)• chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC)• invasive candidiasis• spontaneous central nervous system candidiasis (brain candidiasis)• Candidal endophthalmitis (eye candidiasis)• Candidal osteomyelitis (bone candidiasis)• deep dermatophytosis• chronic invasive dermatophyte infection (​tinea profunda)• pheohyphomycosis (black mold disease)
Infections with Candida can be superficial and chronic (termed “chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis” or CMC). In distinction to the majority of other primary immunodeficiency disorders that cause CMC, CARD9 deficiency distinctly predisposes to invasive infection with Candida (termed “invasive candidiasis”), where the Candida can invade beyond the skin to go to other parts of the body. A very distinct manifestation is Candida involving the brain or the meninges (the protective layer of the brain, resulting in meningitis). In some cases of CARD9 deficiency where Candida infects the brain, the affected patients have radiologic brain imaging (for example, by CT or MRI) and are found to have mass(es) that resemble brain cancers; however, on biopsy, there is no cancer and only Candida infection is found. CARD9 deficiency can also lead to candida infection of the eye (leading to loss of vision) or of bone (leading to pain in the affected area). In all of these cases of invasive candidiasis, there is no risk factor for the fungus to reach these organs (the usual risk factors include things such as leukemia, chemotherapy, intravenous lines, all of which are absent in affected individuals).The invasive candidiasis may appear to be successfully treated with antifungal drugs that target Candida, although the infection may recur (relapse), when the antifungal drug is stopped; in some instances, it may recur even when the person is currently taking the right antifungal drug.
Infections with dermatophytes and “black molds” tend be chronic and difficult to treat, responding partially or poorly to antifungal drugs. They can be disfiguring and they can also spread from the skin to lymph nodes and deep organs, including the brain.
There has been a report of other fungal infections associated with CARD9 deficiency, although the evidence has been less conclusive.
Although CARD9 deficiency is a genetic disorder, the invasive fungal infection can occur at any age. In fact, most of the reported cases have been in adults. Males and females are equally affected.

