Cardiofaciocutaneous Syndrome

synonyms:
cardio-facial-cutaneous syndromeCFC syndromeRASopathy

overview:
Summary

Cardiofaciocutaneous (CFC) syndrome is one of the RASopathies and is a rare genetic disorder is typically characterized by unusually sparse, brittle, curly hair; relatively large head (relative macrocephaly); a prominent forehead and abnormal narrowing of the sides of the forehead (bi-temporal narrowing); intellectual disability; failure to thrive; heart defects that are present at birth (congenital) or acquired later; short stature and skin abnormalities. CFC syndrome is a dominant disorder often caused by de novo (new) mutations in one of four genes calledBRAF,MAP2K1(MEK1),MAP2K2(MEK2), andKRAS. Some affected individuals do not have a mutation in one of these genes, suggesting that other genes are also associated with CFC syndrome.

Introduction

CFC syndrome was first described in 1986, based on the observation of eight unrelated patients who had intellectual disability and similar abnormalities in facial appearance, skin, hair, nails and heart.

symptoms:
Most individuals are initially referred because of feeding difficulties (poor suck) and failure to thrive. Later, cognitive developmental delay and other clinical manifestations may be observed.
Facial Appearance
Affected individuals may have a relatively large head (macrocephaly) when compared to their height, a high forehead and abnormal narrowing of the sides of the forehead (bitemporal narrowing), causing the head to appear “box-like” in shape. The ears are abnormally angulated towards the back of the head and low set (posteriorly angulated) with the ear lobes occasionally having creasing. The nose is short, bulbous and with anteverted nostrils and a depressed bridge. There is also an underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the ridges of the bone above the eyes (supraorbital ridges); widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); downslant of eyelid openings and drooping of one or both upperlids (ptosis).
Skin, hair and nails
Most patients have some kind of ectodermal abnormality, either of skin, hair or nails. Children with CFC Syndrome usually have sparse, slow growing, fine or thick, curly scalp hair that is abnormally dry and brittle. They also have absent or sparse eyebrows and eyelashes. In some children, the nails are dystrophic, with broad flat nails, and/or fast growing. Skin involvement ranges from dry skin to the skin disease known as hyperkeratosis. Pigmented nevi are very distinct to CFC syndrome and help define the syndrome. Other typical skin manifestations include small hard bumps (keratosis pilaris), facial skin lesions around the eyebrows (ulerythema ophryogenes), and benign vascular tumors (infantile hemangiomas).
Heart
Congenital heart defects are present in over 75% of patients, with the most common heart defects being pulmonic stenosis and atrial or ventricular septal defects. There may also be hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (thickening of the heart muscle) and rhythm disturbances. These defects may be diagnosed at birth or later in life.
Intellectual Disability
There is some form of cognitive or neurologic delay in nearly all patients with CFC syndrome. Most individuals fall in the range of moderate intellectual disability. Global developmental delay including gross motor and language delay is very common. Autism and other sensory behavioral issues have been reported in some individuals with CFC syndrome.
Ocular
Symptoms affecting the eyes can effect both their appearance: ocular hypertelorism (increased distance between eyes), strabismus (uneven alignment of the eyes) and their function; involuntary eye movements, astigmatism, nearsightedness and/or farsightedness. Optic nerve hypoplasia, cortical blindness, and cataracts have been described. Although most individuals with CFC syndrome have ocular symptoms, some have a normal ophthalmologic examination.
Feeding/gastrointestinal
Severe feeding problems manifest as gastroesophageal reflux (GER), aspiration, vomiting, and affected individuals will avoid eating (avoidance of eating can lead to growth delays). Often individuals with gastrointestinal symptoms will require a feeding tube that may persist into early childhood. Other GI problems include dysmotility, intestinal malrotation (abnormal development of the intestine), hernia, and/or constipation. Some individuals have inflammation of the spleen and/or liver. Most children have malnutrition secondary to avoidance of eating. Fatty liver and anal stenosis (tightening of the anal sphincter) have also been reported.
Endocrine Abnormalities
Affected individuals can have growth hormone deficiency and early onset puberty.
Growth Delays
Growth may be normal with appropriate birth weight and length; however, weight and length may drop to below the fifth percentile during early infancy while head circumference remains within the normal range, which gives the appearance of macrocephaly.
Additional Abnormalities
Additional abnormalities that are present in some but not all patients include short stature; webbed neck; abnormal shape of the thorax (pectus carinatum); joint hyperextension; hypotonia (reduced muscle tone), neoplasia (typically lymphyoblastic leukemia), especially during the first years of life; urogenital anomalies; seizures; and undescended testes (cryptorchidism) of boys.

