Carnitine Palmitoyltransferase 1A Deficiency

synonyms:
CPT 1A deficiencyhepatic carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1 deficiencyhepatic CPT1L-CPT1 deficiency

overview:
Summary
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A (CPT1A) deficiency is a disorder of fatty acid oxidation, the process by which the body breaks down fatty acids from food for energy. Fatty acids come from animal and vegetable fats. People with CPT1A deficiency may experience liver failure which can cause damage to the nervous system (hepatic encephalopathy) as a result of fatty acids not being properly broken down. CPT1A deficiency is caused by harmful DNA changes (mutations) in theCPT1Agene. TheCPT1Agene produces the carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1 enzyme, which breaks down long fatty acids. CPT1A deficiency is an autosomal recessive condition, which means that a harmful change in theCPT1Agene was inherited from both parents.

symptoms:
CPT1A deficiency in a developing baby can cause abnormal findings during pregnancy, including maternal fatty liver, low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), abnormal liver enzymes, high amounts of ammonia (hyperammonenmia), and increased susceptibility to bleeding due to abnormal liver function.
CPT1A deficiency can be identified on newborn screening, a blood test performed on newborns shortly after birth. Newborn screening can detect levels of fatty acid oxidation products, and abnormal levels can indicate that a newborn has CPT1A deficiency. However, newborn screening is not diagnostic, and further testing is needed to confirm a diagnosis.
CPT1A deficiency symptoms typically appear after times of stress, like fasting or illness. These symptoms include low blood glucose and no ketone bodies in urine (hypoketotic hypoglycemia). Ketone bodies are molecules that are produced by the liver after fatty acids are broken down. Additionally, CPT1A deficiency can cause sudden liver failure. Liver failure can lead to damage to the nervous system (hepatic encephalopathy). Additionally, there can be other abnormal laboratory findings which may include increased liver enzymes, ammonia (hyperammonemia), and carnitine in blood.

