Caroli Disease

synonyms:
congenital dilatation of intrahepatic bile ductcongenital communicating cavernous ectasia of the intrahepatic biliary tract

overview:
Summary
Caroli disease is a rare genetic condition that causes the bile ducts in the liver to be wider than usual. Widening (dilation) of the bile ducts in the liver (intrahepatic bile ducts) can cause bile duct stones to form, which can lead to yellowing of the skin (jaundice) and flu-like symptoms. People with Caroli disease can have many episodes of these symptoms over their lifetime.
A different type of Caroli disease is called Caroli syndrome. It is common to group these two conditions together because they share features. People with Caroli syndrome have scarring on their liver (congenital hepatic fibrosis) which can cause high blood pressure in the veins in the liver (portal hypertension) as well as problems with the bile ducts in the liver. Sometimes, people with Caroli syndrome can develop cysts on their kidneys (polycystic kidney disease). Symptoms of Caroli syndrome are similar to Caroli disease, but can also include blood in the stools, frequent illnesses, and pain in the abdomen. Symptoms of these two conditions usually begin by the age of 30, but can happen at any age. Treatment may involve antibiotics or surgery to remove part of the liver, depending on symptoms and the parts of the liver that are damaged. Caroli disease and Caroli syndrome are thought to be genetic conditions.
Introduction
Caroli disease was first described in 1958 by a French physician named Dr. Jacques Caroli. He was a gastroenterologist who learned that some people had dilated bile ducts in their liver. He also noticed that some people had scarring on their liver in addition to having dilated bile ducts. Those who just had wider bile ducts were then known to have Caroli disease and those who had liver scarring would be known to have Caroli syndrome. Caroli disease is referred to as congenital dilation of intrahepatic bile duct, which means that somebody is born with wider than normal bile ducts in their liver.
Bile is made inside of the liver and sent to the digestive system through ducts to help break down fatty foods for the body to use as energy. These bile ducts are important because they need to be able to transport the bile to other parts of the body. If these bile ducts become too wide, bile will begin to collect and can make the bile ducts inside of the liver swollen (cholangitis). Cholangitis can cause pain in the stomach, fever, tiredness, and nausea and vomiting.
Caroli disease is usually diagnosed after a person first experiences the symptoms listed above. Having a diagnosis can help the medical team stop bile from collecting in the bile ducts in the future. Medication such as antibiotics can be used to prevent irritation, as well. Surgery is typically put off until symptoms start, since it is an invasive procedure. Surgery can be used to remove part of the liver where the bile ducts are too wide (hemi-hepatectomy) and if the patient is having too many episodes of cholangitis.
The other type of Caroli disease, Caroli syndrome, causes the tissue in the liver to scar (congenital hepatic fibrosis) which also causes the bile ducts to be wider than usual. This can also cause the blood pressure in the portal vein, which is blood vessels of the liver, to be high (portal hypertension). Medications such as beta-blockers can be added to help with portal hypertension. People with Caroli syndrome are at an increased risk to develop many cysts or growths on their kidneys (polycystic kidney disease), so they may need medication and surgery to help their kidneys work properly.

symptoms:
Bile needs to be able to move through the bile ducts without getting stuck. When these ducts become too wide, bile can collect easily. As bile collects over time, the build-up can cause small stones to form. These small stones usually do not cause symptoms unless they block the bile duct. When a bile duct is blocked due to stones, the bile ducts become swollen (cholangitis). This can cause pain on the right side of the body, vomiting, fever, and yellowing of the skin (jaundice). People with Caroli disease experience many episodes of cholangitis. Rarely, tumors called cholangiocarcinomas can form in the bile duct due to the build-up of bile. Usually, symptoms happen before the age of 30, but can happen at any age. Some people with Caroli disease may only have one episode of cholangitis, so it is important to understand how the disease impacts a person’s life.
The liver has its own bile ducts and its own blood vessels that make up the hepatic portal system. The portal system carries blood from the digestive organs to the liver in order for the liver to filter out waste. The liver needs to form correctly in order to work. Sometimes, people are born with a condition that causes their liver to have scarring and to be larger than normal (congenital hepatic fibrosis). This also changes the way their bile ducts in the liver are formed, putting them at a higher risk to have cholangitis. Since the hepatic portal system is also not formed correctly, blood pressure in these veins is higher than normal. People with Caroli syndrome have congenital hepatic fibrosis. Caroli syndrome is progressive meaning that damage to the liver is done over time. This condition can lead to liver failure and polycystic kidney disease.

