Castleman Disease

synonyms:
angiofollicular lymph node hyperplasiaangiomatous lymphoidCastleman tumorgiant benign lymphomagiant lymph node hyperplasiahamartoma of the lymphatics

overview:
Castleman disease describes a group of rare disorders with a wide range of symptoms. People with these conditions have enlarged lymph nodes that have a similar appearance when reviewed under the microscope. Castleman disease is first classified based on the number of regions of enlarged lymph nodes that have these abnormal features. Unicentric Castleman disease (UCD) involves a single enlarged lymph node or single region of enlarged lymph nodes whereas multicentric Castleman disease (MCD) involves multiple regions of enlarged lymph nodes. There are two subtypes of MCD. One subtype is caused by human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8; also known as Kaposi sarcoma–associated herpesvirus). These cases are called HHV-8-associated MCD. The other subtype includes MCD patients who are negative for the HHV-8 virus, and the cause is unknown. These cases are called HHV-8 negative or “idiopathic” MCD (iMCD).
Castleman disease can also be described as hyaline-vascular, plasmacytic, or mixed histopathologic variant based on the microscopic appearance. The usefulness of these additional descriptions is unclear.

symptoms:
The spectrum of disease symptoms and severity is very broad, ranging from gradual enlargement of lymph nodes with mild symptoms to sudden, intense onset of symptoms due to life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by elevated cytokines such as interleukin-6 (IL-6). Symptoms of Castleman disease often overlap with symptoms of other more common illnesses. A Castleman disease diagnosis can therefore only be made with a lymph node biopsy that shows characteristic Castleman disease features and when other illnesses have been evaluated and excluded.
Unicentric Castleman Disease (UCD)
UCD is characterized by a single enlarged lymph node or multiple enlarged lymph nodes in a single region of the body, such as the chest, abdomen or neck. Most patients with UCD have no symptoms (asymptomatic). UCD symptoms tend to be mild and occur secondary to compression of surrounding structures by rapidly enlarging lymph nodes. Occasionally, patients experience symptoms due to the size and location of the growth. For example, a growth may form next to a vein, resulting in a bulge and possible obstruction in the involved blood vessel. Less commonly, some UCD patients experience systemic inflammatory symptoms such as fever, fatigue, excessive sweating, weight loss and skin rash as well as laboratory abnormalities such as low hemoglobin and elevated C-reactive protein. These symptoms are typically seen in MCD. These symptoms usually disappear after surgical excision of the UCD lymph node.
Multicentric Castleman Disease (MCD)
Patients with multicentric Castleman disease (MCD) have enlarged lymph nodes in multiple regions and more severe symptoms than UCD. Some patients are HHV-8 positive (HHV-8 MCD) whereas other patients are HHV-8-negative/idiopathic (iMCD).
Signs and symptoms of iMCD include:
•	Flu-like symptoms: fever, fatigue, weight loss, night sweats, loss of appetite, nausea and vomiting•	Abnormally large lymph nodes, typically in the neck, armpit, collarbone and groin•	Enlarged spleen or liver•	Eruptive cherry hemangiomas•	Edema (swelling), ascites (fluid accumulation in the abdomen) and/or other symptoms of fluid accumulation•	Peripheral neuropathy (numbness in the hands and feet)•	Elevated inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate)•	Kidney dysfunction•	Low albumin•	Anemia (low amount of red blood cells)•	Low or high platelet counts•	Elevated immunoglobulins or gamma globulins
iMCD patients can be further subdivided into iMCD-TAFRO or iMCD-NOS. iMCD-TAFRO is characterized by thrombocytopenia (low platelet count), anasarca (ascites, swelling), fever or elevated C-reactive protein (inflammation marker), reticulin fibrosis (evaluated in bone marrow biopsy) and organomegaly (hepatomegaly/splenomegaly). iMCD-NOS typically involves thrombocytosis (elevated platelet count) and elevated immunoglobulins with a less intense disease course.
Patients with HHV-8-associated MCD (HHV-8 MCD) also have multiple regions of enlarged lymph nodes and episodic inflammatory symptoms. HHV-8 MCD is most commonly diagnosed in HIV-infected or otherwise immunocompromised individuals so these patients may experience additional symptoms related to their HIV infection or other conditions.
The following disorders may be associated with Castleman disease as secondary characteristics:
iMCD has been diagnosed in some patients with POEMS (polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, monoclonal plasma cell disorder and skin changes) syndrome. (For more information on this disorder, choose “POEMS” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
There is an increased rate of cancer diagnosed in patients with iMCD and HHV-8-associated MCD.
Patients with UCD are at increased risk of developing paraneoplastic pemphigus (PNP), which is a rare autoimmune condition that can be life threatening. PNP involves blisters in the mouth and on the skin that are often misdiagnosed as occurring for another reason. Though the risk of developing PNP is low (<5%) among patients with UCD, it is the deadliest potential complication of UCD and should be evaluated in all UCD patients. 

Patients with HHV-8-associated MCD are at increased risk of developing Kaposi’s sarcoma, which is a malignant skin tumor that may spread to other parts of the body. Affected individuals may have skin lesions (e.g., papules, plaques, etc.) that may grow and come together (coalesce). In some patients, the lesions may reduce in size and number (regress). On rare occasions these lesions may be painful.

