Cat Eye Syndrome

synonyms:
CESchromosome 22, inverted duplication (22pter-22q11)chromosome 22, partial tetrasomy (22pter-22q11)chromosome 22, partial trisomy (22pter-22q11)Schmid-Fraccaro syndrome

overview:
Cat eye syndrome (CES) is a rare chromosomal disorder that may be evident at birth. Individuals with a normal chromosomal make-up have two 22nd chromosomes, both of which have a short arm, known as 22p, and a long arm, known as 22q. However, in individuals with CES, the short arm and a small region of the long arm of chromosome 22 (i.e., 22pter-22q11) are present four times (partial tetrasomy) rather than twice in cells of the body. In a small number of people with CES, the 22q11 region is present in 3 copies (partial trisomy).
The name “cat eye syndrome” is derived from a distinctive eye (ocular) abnormality that is present in a little over half affected individuals. This defect, known as a coloboma, usually appears as a cleft or gap in the iris below the pupil, and the elongated pupil therefore resembles the appearance of a cat’s eye. There are, however, many other features associated with CES involving many organs and systems. These symptoms result from abnormal development during embryo and fetal stages. Associated symptoms vary greatly in presence and severity from one person to another, including among members of the same family. CES may be best thought of as a disorder spectrum. While some people may have few or mild manifestations, others may have multiple severe malformations.

symptoms:
The classic symptoms associated with CES are ocular coloboma, anal atresia and the minor ear defect preauricular skin tags or pits (see below for explanations). However, the syndrome is extremely variable, and it has been estimated that only 41% of patients with CES have this classic triad of symptoms (Berends et al, 2001). In general the abnormalities associated with CES tend to involve the eyes, ears, anal region, heart, and/or kidneys, but other organs may show involvement and some people show intellectual disability.
Below are discussed the most common features of CES. Table 1 gives the estimated incidence of symptoms from two different studies. These estimates are likely to be overestimates. Some affected individuals may manifest no symptoms (asymptomatic) or so few symptoms that they may not be diagnosed with the disorder. Although the CES chromosome is usually new and not inherited from a parent, there are a few inherited cases where the birth of a child with multiple features of CES results in the discovery of a mild case in a parent. The incidence of mild unrecognized cases of CES in the population, while likely rare, is unknown. The presence of the CES chromosome therefore in no way predicts the presence or severity of symptoms. Affected individuals will rarely have all of the symptoms discussed below and every case is different and unique. If a symptom is present in only one case, that may have an independent cause (not part of the syndrome). Parents should talk to their children’s physician and medical team about their child, potential associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
1) Coloboma and other eye abnormalitiesA coloboma (plural colobomata or colobomas) consists of the partial absence of ocular tissue, often affecting both eyes (bilateral). It results from the failure to close a fissure in the lower part of the eye during early development, resulting in a cleft or gap that persists. Affected ocular tissues may include the colored portion of the eye that controls the amount of light that enters into the eye (iris), the dark-brown, middle layer (choroid), and/or the nerve-rich innermost membrane (retina) of the eye. Iris coloboma may give the iris an unusual “keyhole” appearance. If only the iris is involved, then vision is not affected. However, a more extensive coloboma involving other layers of the eye may result in vision defects and/or blindness. Although coloboma was originally considered a primary feature of the disorder, this abnormality is only present in a little over half of individuals with CES.
Some affected individuals have additional eye abnormalities, such crossing of the eyes (strabismus); and/or abnormal smallness of one of the eyes (unilateral microphthalmia). Less frequently, other ocular defects may be present including absence of the iris (aniridia); clouding of the dome-shaped, normally transparent region of the front of the eyeball (cornea); absence of tissue from portions of the eyelid (eyelid coloboma); loss of transparency of the lens of the eye (cataract), and/or Duane syndrome. The latter is a condition characterized by the limitation or absence of certain horizontal eye movements and retraction or “drawing back” of the eyeball into the eye cavity (orbit) upon attempting to look inward. In some cases, depending on the severity and/or combination of eye abnormalities present, varying degrees of visual impairment may result, including blindness.
2) Anal abnormalitiesIn approximately ¾ of affected individuals, the anal opening may be unusually small or narrow (anal stenosis) or the anal canal may be absent (anal atresia), sometimes with a passage (fistula) from the end portion of the large intestine (rectum) into abnormal locations. In males, fistulae may form between the rectum and the muscular organ that collects urine (bladder), the tube that excretes urine from the bladder (urethra), or the area behind the genitals (perineum). In females, fistulae may be present between the rectum and the bladder or the vagina. Anal atresia and fistulae are corrected surgically.
3) Ear AbnormalitiesThe third classic feature of CES is preauricular skin tags and/or pits. It is the most common feature of CES, seen in over 80% of people. Affected individuals may have small outgrowths of skin (tags) and/or slight depressions (pits) in front of the outer ears (preauricular). In addition, the outer portions of the ears (auricles) may be low set and/or malformed (dysplastic), sometimes with blind-ending or absent external ear canals (microtia). In most cases, absence (atresia) of the external ear canal tends to affect one ear and may cause mild hearing impairment due to inadequate transmission of sound from the external to the inner ear (conductive hearing loss).
4) Heart defectsAbout half of individuals with CES have structural abnormalities of the heart at birth (congenital heart defects), particularly “total anomalous pulmonary venous return” or “tetralogy of Fallot”. Associated symptoms and findings may vary, depending on the size, nature, and/or combination of heart malformations present. In people with severe disease, congenital heart disease may lead to life-threatening complications.
Total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR) is characterized by abnormalities in blood flow to the heart. The pulmonary veins normally return oxygenated blood from both lungs to the left upper chamber (left atrium) of the heart. However, in infants with TAPVR, the pulmonary veins improperly return blood directly to the upper right chamber (right atrium) of the heart or to veins draining into the right atrium. There is also a hole between the two atria (atrial septal defect), leading to mixing of oxygenated and oxygen-deficient blood. Associated symptoms and findings may include bluish discoloration of the skin and mucous membranes due to low blood oxygen (cyanosis), abnormally rapid breathing (tachypnea), rising blood pressure in the lungs (pulmonary hypertension), inability of the heart to pump enough blood to meet the body’s requirements for oxygen (heart failure), and/or other abnormalities. Although TAPVR is a rare heart defect, representing only 1-2% of heart defects in children, it is one of the most common heart defects in CES.
Tetralogy of Fallot consists of a combination of cardiac defects. These include an abnormal opening in the partition (septum) separating the two lower chambers of the heart (ventricular septal defect); obstruction of the proper outflow of blood from the right ventricle to the lungs due to narrowing of the opening between the ventricle and the pulmonary artery (pulmonary stenosis), displacement of the aorta, enabling oxygen-depleted blood to flow from the right ventricle to the aorta; and thickening (hypertrophy) of heart muscle of the right ventricle. The pulmonary artery transports oxygen-depleted blood from the right ventricle to the lungs, where the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide occurs. The aorta, the major artery of the body, arises from the left ventricle and supplies oxygen-rich blood to most arteries. The symptoms associated tetralogy of Fallot can different in one person compared to another. NORD has a separate report on this disorder. (For more information, choose “tetralogy of Fallot” as your search term in the NORD Rare Disease Database.)
Holes between the atria or ventricles (atrial or ventricle septal defects) are also common heart defects associated with CES. A variety of other heart defects have been reported.
5) Kidney and genital defectsCollectively defects of the urinary system and the reproductive organs are classified as urogenital defects. These two systems have a common origin in the embryo. Typical kidney defects associated with CES include underdevelopment of one or both kidneys (unilateral or bilateral renal hypoplasia); absence of a kidney (unilateral agenesis); the presence of an additional kidney (supernumerary kidney); abnormal swelling (distention) of and accumulation of urine in the kidneys (hydronephrosis); and/or abnormal development of renal cysts (cystic dysplasia). Typical reproductive tract defects in females include underdevelopment of the uterus, absence of the vagina or abnormal genitalia. In males defects include undescended testes (cryptorchidism) and external genital abnormalities.
6) Intellectual disabilitySome individuals with CES have normal intelligence. However, some may have borderline normal to mild intellectual disability, or, less commonly, moderate intellectual disability. Berends et al, 2001 compared the IQ scores of 51 patients and found 47% in the normal range, 22 % borderline normal, 18% with mild intellectual disability and 14% with moderate intellectual disability. Rare cases of severe intellectual disability have also been reported. Individuals with intellectual disability may experience delays in reaching developmental milestones that require the coordination of muscular and mental activity (psychomotor delays).
7) Skeletal defectsTypical skeletal abnormalities may include abnormal sideways curvature of the spine (scoliosis); abnormal fusion of certain bones in the spinal column (vertebral fusions); absence of the bone on the thumb side of the forearm (radial aplasia); absence or abnormal fusion (synostosis) of certain ribs; absence of certain toes and/or duplication of the large toes (hallux); and/or dislocation of the hips.
8) Abdominal defectsIn some individuals with CES, portions of the intestine may protrude through a defect in the abdominal wall at the navel (umbilical hernia) or into the canal that passes through lower muscular layers of the abdominal wall (inguinal hernia). Additional reported features have included an abnormal saclike protrusion (Meckel diverticulum) from the lower small intestine (ileum), or Hirschsprung disease, which is the incomplete rotation of the upper large intestine (cecum), and/or the absence of groups of nerve fibers (ganglia) in the muscular wall of the large intestine resulting in impairment or absence of the involuntary, rhythmic contractions (peristalsis) that propel waste materials through the lower digestive tract. Associated findings may include an abnormal accumulation of feces within the colon, widening of the colon above the affected segment (megacolon), abdominal bloating, periodic vomiting, loss of appetite (anorexia), and/or other abnormalities.
In addition, bile ducts may fail to develop or develop abnormally (biliary atresia). Bile, a liquid secreted by the liver, plays an essential role in carrying waste products from the liver and breaking down fats in the small intestine. The bile ducts are narrow tubes through which bile passes from the liver to the first section of the small intestine (duodenum). Due to such absence or underdevelopment of bile ducts, bile is unable to reach the intestine and abnormally accumulates in the liver. Associated findings may include yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes, and whites of the eyes (jaundice); abnormally dark urine; pale feces; enlargement of the liver; growth failure. Without appropriate treatment, scarring and impaired functioning of the liver may lead to potentially life-threatening complications.
9) Cleft PalateCleft palate is the incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth. Varying degrees of this defect may be seen in 14-31% of individuals with CES (Berends et al, 2001, Rosias et al, 2001).
10) Short StatureShort stature has been reported in 15-50% of individuals with CES (Berends et al, 2001, Rosias et al, 2001). However, it is not yet clear that this is associated with a deficiency of growth hormone in most affected individuals.
11) Abnormal facial featuresMost individuals with CES show abnormal features of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region. Common features include downwardly slanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures); eyes that are widely spaced apart (ocular hypertelorism), and vertical skin folds that may cover the inner corners of the eyes (epicanthal folds), an abnormally small lower jaw (mandibular hypoplasia or micrognathia) and a flat nasal bridge.
Table 1: Typical features of cat eye syndrome present in over 10% of affected individuals.Incidences are from two independent review papers from 2001. Incidences likely differ due to variation in the cases examined, the definition of features used and the amount of detail available in the published case reports reviewed. Incidences should be considered overestimates, since mild undiagnosed cases would not be included.
Symptom…………………………….Berends et al. (2001)……….Rosias et al. (2001)
Coloboma (eye defect)……………………. ……..55% (40/73)…………..61% (54/88)Anal and rectum defects…………………………. 73% (54/74)…………..81% (71/88)Preauricular tags or pits (Outer ear defect)……..81% (60/74)……………87% (78/90)Heart defects………………………………………. 50% (37/74)…………….3% (50/80)Kidney Defects…………………………………….. 31% (22/72)……………….–…….Kidney and Genital Defects…………………………… – ………………….71% (55/77)Intellectual disability……………………………….. 32% (16/50)………….56% (38/68)Skeletal defects……………………………………. 29% (21/73)…………..73% (46/63)Abdominal defects…………………………………………– ………………..69% (33/48)– Hirschsprung disease……………………………………..– ……………..12.5% (6/48)– Biliary atresia……………………………………………. – …………………8% (4/48)Cleft Palate………………………………………….. 14% (10/72)…………….. –……..Cleft palate or absent uvula………………………………. – ………………31% (15/48)Short stature…………………………………………. 15% (9/62) ………….50% (32/64)Downslanting palpebral fissures (eye abnormality) ..7% (34/73)…………69% (48/70)Hypertelorism (wide set eyes)……………………… 38% (28/73)…………70% (48/69)Microphthalmia (small eye)………………………… 19% (10/54) …………39% (23/59)Epicanthal folds……………………………………… 26% (19/74) …………64% (29/45)Hearing loss…………………………………………. 17% (9/54) …………..16% (11/68)

