Catel Manzke Syndrome

synonyms:
Catel-Manzke Type Palatodigital SyndromeHyperphalangy-Clinodactyly of Index Finger with Pierre Robin SyndromeMicrognathia-Digital Syndrome

overview:
Summary
Catel-Manzke syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by distinctive abnormalities of the index fingers and the classic features of Pierre Robin sequence. Affected individuals have an extra bone at the base of the index that causes the index fingers to be locked in a bent position (clinodactyly). Pierre Robin sequence refers to abnormalities that may occur as a distinct syndrome or as part of another underlying disorder. Pierre Robin sequence is characterized by an unusually small jaw (micrognathia), downward displacement or retraction of the tongue (glossoptosis), and incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate). A variety of additional physical findings can also be present. The specific symptoms can vary from one person to another. Alterations (mutations) in theTGDSgene have been identified in individuals with Catel-Manzke syndrome.
Introduction
Catel-Manzke syndrome was first described in the medical literature in 1961 by Dr. Catel and later further evaluated by Dr. Manzke in 1966. The disorder was originally referred to as a palatodigital syndrome, but because cleft palate does not always occur, Dr. Manzke suggested replacing palatodigital syndrome with micrognathia-digital syndrome.

symptoms:
Although researchers have been able to establish a clear syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about the disorder is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified cases, the lack of large clinical studies, and the possibility of other genes influencing the disorder prevent physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Parents should talk to their children’s physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
Infants with Catel-Manzke syndrome have an extra (supernumerary), irregularly-shaped bone (hyperphalangy) located between the first bone of the index finger (proximal phalanx) and the corresponding bone within the body of the hand (second metacarpal). As a result, the lower part of the index finger may bend toward the thumb and the upper part may bend toward the pinky. Eventually, the extra bone may fuse with the proximal phalanx and second metacarpal. Consequently, the index fingers may be fixed in an abnormally bent position (clinodactyly). These distinctive findings of the index fingers may be known as Manzke dysostosis.
In many cases, affected individuals also have the three findings of Pierre-Robin sequence including an unusually small jaw (micrognathia), downward displacement or retraction of the tongue (glossoptosis), and incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate). However, cleft palate is not always present and a few cases none of the features of Pierre-Robin sequence develop. Individuals with micrognathia and glossoptosis may have feeding and breathing difficulties resulting in growth deficiency and failure to thrive.
In addition, some infants with the syndrome may have structural abnormalities of the heart that are present at birth (congenital heart defects), mostly commonly ventricular or atrial septal defects. Better known as “a hole in the heart” these defects occur when there is a hole in the wall (septum) separating the two upper chambers (ventricles) of the heart from each other or in the septum separating the two lower chambers (atria) from each other.
Less often, some affected infants may also have additional abnormalities of the hands. Such malformations may include abnormal bending or deviation (clinodactyly) of the “pinkies” or fifth fingers; abnormal division of the first bone of the middle of the hand (bifurcated first metacarpal); adducted thumbs; and/or a single deep crease across the palms of the hands.
Affected individuals may also have distinctive facial features including eyes that are spaced apart wider than usual (hypertelorism), full cheeks, low-set ears, thin eyebrows, narrow nostrils, and a cleft or area of missing tissue in the colored portion of the eye (iris coloboma). Additional skeletal abnormalities may occur including abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis), an unusually prominent or sunken breastbone (pectus carinatum or pectus excavatum), short big toes (short halluces), clubfoot (talipes equinovarus), looseness (laxity) of certain joints, and dislocation of the joints, such as dislocation of the knees.
Some children may experience delays is reaching developmental milestones. Mild-to-moderate intellectual disability and has been reported in few individuals, although in the majority of affected individual intelligence is not affected.

