Caudal Regression Syndrome

synonyms:
caudal dysplasiacaudal dysplasiacaudal dysplasia sequencesacral agenesis, congenitalsacral regression

overview:
Summary
Caudal regression syndrome is a broad term for a rare complex disorder characterized by abnormal development of the lower (caudal) end of the spine. The spine consists of many small bones (vertebrae) that collectively form the spinal column. The spinal column is generally broken down into three segments – the cervical spine, consisting of the vertebrae just below the skull; the thoracic spine, consisting of the vertebrae in the chest region; and the lumbar spine, consisting of the vertebrae of the lower back. A triangularly shaped bony structure called the sacrum joins the lumbar portion of spine to the pelvis. The sacrum consists of five vertebrae fused together. At the end of the sacrum is the tailbone (coccyx). A wide range of abnormalities may potentially occur in infants with caudal regression syndrome including abnormal development (agenesis) of the sacrum and coccyx and abnormalities of the lumbar spine. More severe malformations may occur in some people. Abnormalities of the lower spine can cause a variety of additional complications including joint contractures, clubfeet and disruption or damage of the end of the spinal cord may occur, potentially causing urinary incontinence. Additional anomalies of the gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, heart, respiratory system, upper limbs and upper portions of the spine can also occur. The exact cause of caudal regression syndrome is unknown. Both environmental and genetic factors are suspected to play a role in the development of the disorder.
Introduction
Some sources in the medical literature classify a condition called sirenomelia as the most severe form of caudal regression syndrome. However, recently many researchers have indicated that sirenomelia is a similar, but distinct, disorder. NORD has a separate report on sirenomelia.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms and severity of caudal regression syndrome can vary dramatically from one person to another. Caudal regression syndrome most likely represents a spectrum of disease ranging from cases with milder symptoms to cases with severe, disabling or potentially life-threatening complications. It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below and that one child’s experience will vary (sometimes dramatically) from another child’s. Parents of affected children should talk to their physician and medical team about their child’s specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
Infants with caudal regression syndrome have abnormalities affecting the sacral and lumbar spine. Some affected infants may only have isolated abnormal development of the sacrum (sacral) agenesis. In others, the sacrum may be absent altogether. Sacral agenesis is often associated with narrowing of the hips, underdeveloped of the muscles of the buttock (hypoplastic gluteal muscles), an indentation on the skin of the lower back (sacral dimple) and flattening of the buttocks. In some children, abnormalities of the lumber vertebrae may also occur.
The abnormal development of the caudal region of the spine can cause additional abnormalities affecting the spinal cord and lower limbs. In some patients, disruption or damage to the lower portion of the spinal cord may occur causing a variety of neurological abnormalities including defective bladder and bowel control, increased urinary frequency and failure of the bladder to empty completely (neurogenic bladder). The urological abnormalities potentially associated with caudal regression syndrome can be significant.
Damage to the nerves can also cause abnormalities of the lower limbs. Such abnormalities may include flexion contractures of the knee and hip. A contracture is a condition in which a joint becomes permanently fixed in a bent (flexed) or straightened (extended) position, completely or partially restricting the movement of the affected joint. Affected infants may also have reduced muscle mass in the legs, clubfeet or webbed skin on the back of the knees (popliteal ptergyium). When present, the severity of lower limb abnormalities can vary. Some individuals will walk unassisted; others may need an assistance device such as crutches, braces, walkers or in severe cases, a wheelchair.
Infants with caudal regression syndrome may have a wide variety of additional physical findings including kidney abnormalities, abnormalities of the upper vertebrae, facial anomalies such as cleft lip, cleft palate, and a condition in which a thin covering blocking the anal opening or the passage that normally connects the anus and lowest part of the large intestine (rectum) fails to develop, which is known as anal atresia or imperforate anus.
Kidney abnormalities that occur in caudal regression syndrome may include the absence of one kidney (renal agenesis). Some affected infants may have kidneys that are not located in their normal position (renal ectopia) or fusion of the tubes that force urine from the kidneys to the bladder (fused ureters). Kidney abnormalities can cause urinary obstruction, neurogenic bladder, or the abnormal backflow of urine from the bladder into the ureters (vesicoureteral reflux).
Some individuals with caudal regression syndrome may have a meningomyelocele, a condition in which the membranes that cover the spine and, in some patients, the spinal cord itself protrude through a defect in the spinal canal. Congenital heart defects and respiratory complications can also be associated with caudal regression syndrome.

