Cavernous Malformation

synonyms:
cavernomacavernous angiomacavernous hemangiomacerebral cavernous malformation (CCM)

overview:
Vascular malformations are localized collections of blood vessels that are abnormal in structure or number. Vascular malformations lead to altered blood flow and are not cancerous (nonneoplastic). In the past, researchers believed that most vascular malformations are present at birth (congenital). However, we now know that cavernous malformation lesions display some cancer-like qualities and can develop throughout the lifetime of the affected individual. The four most common types of vascular malformations are capillary telangiectasias, cavernous malformations, venous malformations, and arteriovenous malformations.
Cavernous malformations are lesions made of dilated blood vessels and characterized by multiple distended “caverns” of blood-filled vasculature through which the blood flows very slowly. Vessels of a cavernous malformation lesion lack the proper junctions between neighboring cells as well as the necessary structural support from smooth muscle and stretchable material (elastin). These properties cause cavernous malformations to leak. Leakage (bleeding) from these vascular lesions is an underlying cause of clinical symptoms associated with the illness. Most often located in the brain, cavernous malformations can also present in the spinal cord, on the skin, and more rarely in the retina.
Cerebral cavernous malformations (CCMs) usually develop in the white matter (cortex) of the brain. CCM lesions lack intervening brain tissue within the malformation. CCMs are dynamic structures, changing in size and number over time, and they can range in size from a few millimeters to several centimeters.
CCMs are present in approximately 0.2% of the general population, and they account for a large proportion (8-15%) of all brain and spinal vascular malformations. While the prevalence of individuals with at least one CCM lesion is quite high, a significant number of affected individuals will remain undiagnosed for their entire lives. As many as 40% of affected individuals may never experience symptoms or become diagnosed with cavernous malformation. A majority of these individuals have only a single lesion, no family history of the disease, and no inherited mutation. These cases are termed ‘sporadic.’ Individuals with the familial (genetic) form of cavernous malformation typically develop multiple lesions and may be more likely to experience symptoms associated with the disorder. People of all ages may be affected by cavernous malformations. Children represent approximately 25% of all diagnosed individuals.
In sporadic cases, it is common for CCM lesions to develop close to an abnormal vein. Developmental venous anomalies (DVA), also called venous malformations or venous angiomas, are a type of vascular malformation that, on its own, do not cause any clinical symptoms. However, when found in combination with a CCM lesion, the DVA complicates the option for surgical intervention, because disturbing the DVA during surgery could cause dangerous bleeding. Association of CCMs with DVAs is uncommon in familial cavernous malformation. With the application of better imaging technologies in recent years, there is consensus among the research and clinical communities that all sporadic lesions form near an abnormal vein or within the vicinity of a DVA. Rarely, multiple sporadic cavernous malformations develop in a cluster near an associated DVA. The significance of DVA in association with sporadic lesions is not entirely understood.

symptoms:
Individuals with cerebral cavernous malformations present with a wide variety of symptoms. Some affected individuals may have no symptoms at all while others may experience headaches or neurological deficits, including weakness in the arms or legs, problems with memory or balance, or difficulties with vision or speech. Hemorrhagic stroke and seizures are the most severe symptoms caused by cavernous malformations. Clinical symptoms vary by individual and are dependent on the location of the lesion(s) and on the propensity to bleed. Spinal cord cavernous malformations can cause numbness, weakness, paralysis, tingling, burning, or itching. Cavernous malformations of the spinal cord can also cause problems with bladder and bowel control.
Seizures are one of the most common symptoms of cavernous malformations. A person who experiences more than one seizure is said to have epilepsy. Seizures tend to worsen with age and frequency. Anti-seizure medications control many cases of epilepsy. However, for some individuals for whom medication is ineffective for seizure control, surgical removal of the cavernous malformation may be necessary. Even if seizures are well controlled with medication, surgery may be recommended to avoid a lifetime of exposure to anti-epilepsy medications. If a person has seizures and more than one cavernous malformation, it may be difficult to pinpoint which cavernous malformation is the cause of the seizures.

