CDKL5 Deficiency Disorder

synonyms:
CDKL5 deficiencyCDKL5 disorderCDKL5 encephalopathyCDKL5-related epilepsyCDKL5-related epileptic encephalopathyEarly infantile epileptic encephalopathy 2CDDSTK9

overview:
Introduction
CDKL5 deficiency disorder (CDD) is a rare developmental epileptic encephalopathy (DEE) caused by changes (variants) in theCDKL5gene. CDD has been classified as a DEE because it is thought that the genetic change results in both the epileptic activity as well as the severe impairment of development. The hallmarks of CDD are the onset of seizures at a very early age, (usually about 3 months but can be as early as the first week of life) and severe neurodevelopmental delay impacting cognitive, motor, speech and visual function. CDD can manifest in a broad range of clinical severity and is often associated with other symptoms such as gastrointestinal and sleep disturbances. Although rare, the occurrence may be between ~1:40,000 and 1:60,000 livebirths, but an Australian population-based study suggested a lower incidence.
Previously known as serine/threonine protein kinase 9 (STK9), CDKL5 stands for cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 and variants in this gene were first identified as disease-causing in 2004. The letters are an abbreviation of the scientific name of the gene which describes what it does. TheCDKL5gene provides instructions for making proteins that are essential for normal brain and neuron development.
TheCDKL5gene is located on the X chromosome. The X chromosome is one of the sex chromosomes; females have two X’s and males have one X and one Y chromosome. Although many identified patients are males, because of the location of the gene, this disorder mainly affects females. Affected males may have more severe symptoms than females unless mosaic in which case they may be milder and have better gross motor ability.

symptoms:
Seizures are a major problem for patients with CDD because they are usually severe and difficult to control with medication. Multiple different types of seizures occur and include infantile spasms, myoclonic seizures and tonic-clonic seizures. Doctors have described more than 30 different types of seizures, and they are divided into two major categories — focal seizures and generalized seizures although not all seizures fit well into these categories. Some individuals have seizures that begin as focal seizures but then spread to the entire brain. Others may have both types of seizures but with no clear pattern.
Everyday functioning has been shown to be severely impaired with about a quarter of affected females and a lesser proportion of males able to walk independently. Fine motor skills, such as the ability to pick up small objects, are also impaired; about half of affected individuals have some purposeful use of their hands. About three quarters have been found to have cortical visual impairment. Most individuals have severe intellectual disability and little or no speech.
Core Symptoms
Epileptic seizures starting early in lifeEpileptic spasms often occurring without hypsarrhythmiaMultiple different types of seizuresLimited ability to walkInability to speak but may use complex gestures/vocalizationLimited hand skillsLack of eye contact (cortical visual impairment)ConstipationSleep difficultiesPurposeless hand movements (stereotypies)Teeth-grinding (bruxism)Poor muscle tone (hypotonia)Intellectual disability
Other Symptoms
Breathing irregularities (such as hyperventilation)Respiratory infectionsVomitingGastroesophageal refluxScoliosisCharacteristics such as a sideways glance and habit of crossing legsBehavioral symptoms such as anxiety and social avoidance
The International CDKL5 Disorder Database was established in September 2012 and is continuing to collect data from families with a child with CDD throughout the world. This database provides the capacity to collect important information which will help to better understand this disorder and the associated medical problems. The first output from the database examined developmental milestones in 127 children with CDD. Overall attainment of milestones was extremely delayed. For example, the median age of independent sitting for girls was 36 months and by five years only three quarters had learned to sit independently. Males generally have more delayed milestones and more impaired development than females, except when mosaic.
Lack of response to anti-epileptic medication often necessitates the need for other therapeutic options such as ketogenic diet or vagal nerve stimulation while there is growing interest in a possible role for medical cannabis. Sleep disturbances which have an impact not only on the child but on the whole family can be extreme, affecting over 80% of individuals at some point in their life. Gastrointestinal problems such as constipation and reflux are common as is compromised nutrition with nearly a quarter of females and almost half of males having a gastrostomy tube inserted by the age of 7.5 years. A proportion of individuals experience frequent respiratory infections often leading to multiple hospital admissions with over a third of families reporting that lower respiratory tract infections were a problem in the first five years of their child’s life.
Relationships with genotype (i.e. type ofCDKL5gene variant) have also been explored using data from the International CDKL5 Database, but difficult to determine because of the large number of unique variants. A catalogue ofCDKL5sequence variations, including pathogenic variants, nonpathogenic polymorphisms, and sequence variations of uncertain significance can be found at the RettBASE website (). Further studies have now been undertaken to understand the characteristics of the small number of variants that are shared by more than one individual so that at least for those with these variants, doctors will be able to provide some information to families about the predicted clinical course for their child.
The International Foundation for CDKL5 Research (IFCR) CDKL5 Centers of Excellence deliver multidisciplinary clinical care and collect clinical and/or research data on patients with CDD in the USA. The first site was established in 2013 and the network has grown to eight sites located at world class institutions. These sites have allowed the development of a CDD specific multicenter clinical research network structure to support clinical research goals and are now engaged in a project with researchers from the International CDKL5 Disorder Database in Western Australia to develop outcome measures for clinical trials.

