Central Core Disease

synonyms:
CCDCCOcentral core disease of musclemuscle core diseasemuscular central core diseasemyopathy, central coremyopathy, central fibrillarShy-Magee syndrome

overview:
Central core disease (CCD) is a rare genetic neuromuscular disorder that is classified as a congenital myopathy, meaning that it is present at birth (congenital) and is a disorder that causes muscle weakness (myopathy). Affected infants have low muscle tone (hypotonia) resulting in abnormal “floppiness”, muscle weakness and a variety of skeletal abnormalities such as side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis). Muscle weakness normally affects the proximal muscles, which are those muscles closest to the center of the body such as the muscles of the shoulder, pelvis and upper arms and legs. Affected infants may experience delays in acquiring motor milestones such as crawling or walking. Some individuals with CCD may be susceptible to developing malignant hyperthermia, a condition in which individuals develop adverse reactions to certain anesthetic drugs during surgical procedures. CCD may be very mild or may cause serious complications. Most cases are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern and associated with stable or slowly progressive muscle disease and a good prognosis. Some cases are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern and are more likely to be associated with severe complications.
The disorder derives its name from characteristic, abnormal areas within the centers of muscle fibers. These abnormal “central cores” are detected during microscopic examination of small samples of muscle tissue (muscle biopsy). The muscle biopsy may reveal characteristic findings such as a lack of mitochondria, the part of the cell that releases energy, or absence of the sarcoplasmic reticulum, a membrane-bound structure in muscle fibers.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms and severity of CCD vary greatly from person to person. Some individuals may develop very mild muscle disease that may go unnoticed or get a congenital myopathy incidental finding report from a next-generation sequencing (NGS) genetic test; others may develop serious muscle disease that can delay motor milestones or cause serious breathing (respiratory) difficulties. In most patients, muscle weakness in CCD is not progressive or only progresses very slowly.
Infants with CCD typically have diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), resulting in abnormal “floppiness”. Weakness of the proximal muscles occurs early during infancy. The proximal muscles are those muscles closest to the center of the body such as the muscles of the shoulder, pelvis and upper arms and legs. In CCD, the hip-girdle area is especially affected by muscle weakness. In some patients, muscle cramps or stiffness may occur especially upon exertion. Muscle weakness may cause delays in reaching milestones that require the coordination and development of muscles (motor milestones) such as crawling, standing and walking. Intelligence is unaffected.
Certain facial muscles may be affected in individuals with CCD. Rarely, individuals may develop wasting of facial muscles. Mild facial muscle involvement may not be noticeable, except for the inability to bury the eyelashes resulting from weakness of muscles surrounding the eyes (signe de cils). In classic, autosomal dominant CCD, the muscles around the eyes are not affected, an important finding that distinguishes CCD from other congenital myopathies. In the autosomal recessive form of CCD, these muscles may be affected.
A variety of skeletal abnormalities often occur in individuals with CCD including abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis) and congenital dislocation of the hip, a condition in which the hip joint is too shallow causing the upper bone of the leg (femur) to pop out of the joint. These skeletal findings may be present at birth. Additional skeletal symptoms may occur including front-to-back curvature of the spine (kyphosis), dislocation of the kneecap (patella), clubfoot (talipes equinovarus), flattening of the arch of the foot (flatfoot or pes panus) and an abnormally high arch of the foot (pes cavus). Abnormal tightening of certain joints, resulting in restricted or stiff movements (contractures) occurs rarely. The Achilles tendon is most common site for contracture.
Some patients with CCD may present with severe symptoms at birth or early during infancy. Severe symptoms associated with CCD may be caused by a prolonged decrease or absence of movements by the fetus (fetal akinesia sequence). Such symptoms include profoundly low muscle tone (hypotonia or floppiness), reduced mobility of many joints of the body due to the overgrowth (proliferation) of fibrous tissue in the joints (arthrogryposis multiplex congenita) and breathing difficulties that may require a mechanical device to assist breathing. Some severely affected infants may not be able to walk independently.
Individuals with CCD have susceptibility to developing malignant hyperthermia, an autosomal dominant genetic disorder in which affected individuals are susceptible to adverse reactions to certain anesthetic drugs. The drugs that trigger malignant hyperthermia are the volatile inhalation gases including sevoflurane, desflurane, isoflurane, halothane, enflurane, methoxyflurane and depolarizing muscle relaxants such a succinylcholine. The characteristics of a malignant hyperthermia episode are variable and include muscle rigidity, high blood pressure (hypertension), increased levels of carbon dioxide in the blood or exhaled gas, a rapid irregular heart rate, rapid deep breathing, bluish skin color (cyanosis), acidity of the blood and muscle damage. Body temperature can rise rapidly (hyperthermia), but sometimes only occurs late in an episode. When an episode is not recognized and treated, internal bleeding, brain damage, skeletal muscle degeneration (rhabdomyolysis) and kidney and heart failure can result.

