Centronuclear Myopathy

synonyms:
autosomal dominant centronuclear myopathy (AD-CNM)autosomal recessive centronuclear myopathy (AR-CNM)CNM

overview:
Summary
Centronuclear myopathy (CNM) is an umbrella term for a group of rare genetic muscle disorders. These disorders are characterized by muscle weakness that can range from mild to profound. Symptoms are often present at birth in the severe forms, but may first develop at any point during life, although onset in adulthood is unusual. CNMs derive their name based on the central location of the muscle fiber (muscle cell) nucleus, which is an abnormal finding that can be seen in muscle biopsies. Muscle fiber nuclei are normally located at the periphery of the muscle fiber. Centrally placed nuclei can be seen when examining muscle biopsy tissue in the microscope and this feature is an important finding to recognize in making a diagnosis of CNM.
There are several genetic forms of CNM including an X-linked form known as myotubular myopathy (XLMTM) and a few autosomal forms, usually referred to as centronuclear myopathy. Autosomal refers to genes that are found on autosomes, or chromosomes other than the X or Y chromosomes (sex chromosomes). Generally, the autosomal forms are less severe than XLMTM, however, in rare cases, individuals with an autosomal form can develop severe complications that are similar to those seen in XLMTM.
Common symptoms include mild to profound muscle weakness and diminished muscle tone (hypotonia). In more severe cases, feeding difficulties and potentially severe breathing complications (respiratory distress) may occur. Feeding difficulties and respiratory distress develop because of weakness of the muscles that are involved in swallowing and breathing. Involvement of the muscles controlling eye movements is common in all different forms. The overall severity of the disorder can range from mildly affected individuals to individuals who develop severe, life-threatening complications during infancy and early childhood. Three different genes,DNM2,BIN1, andRYR1, have been identified that cause autosomal forms of CNM. XLMTM is caused by mutations to the myotubularin (MTM1) gene.
Introduction
Centronuclear myopathies are a group of muscle diseases that are considered part of a larger family of muscle diseases known as congenital myopathies, a group of genetic muscle disorder that are evident at or around the time of birth. In the medical literature, centronuclear myopathy (CNM) is generally used for the autosomal forms of the disorder and myotubular myopathy is generally used for the X-linked form (XLMTM). Distinguishing between the X-linked myotubular form and the autosomal forms of CNM is essential as the symptoms are usually more severe in the X-linked form. NORD has a separate report on X-linked myotubular myopathy that describes that form in greater detail. This report specifically deals with the autosomal forms of centronuclear myopathy.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms and severity of CNMs can vary greatly among the different forms and from one person to another. Some individuals may only develop mild symptoms; others develop serious life-threatening complications. Unlike the X-linked form, the autosomal dominant form of CNM is rarely fatal during childhood. The autosomal recessive forms can be severe or mild. The course of an individual case is often unpredictable. Because of the variable nature of these disorders, parents should talk to their child’s physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
DNM2-RELATED CNMThis form of CNM is caused by mutations of theDNM2gene and is highly variable in presentation and severity. The disorder can be present at birth or develop during childhood or even adulthood. Some individuals will have mild cases that go unnoticed for prolonged periods; others will have symptoms that are present in infancy or early childhood.
Many individuals withDNM2-related CNM have a mild form of the disorder and early development is normal. Symptoms may not develop until adolescence when abnormal fatigue, muscle pain (myalgia) and leg cramps may occur especially when exercising. Muscle weakness associated withDNM2-related CNM can be slowly progressive often during the teen-age years or even during adulthood. Often, weakness predominantly affects the upper legs or arms (proximally), but in some cases can start in the lower arms and legs (distally) and slowly progress to affect the upper arms and legs. Some individuals may experience delays in attaining certain developmental milestones such as walking, running or climbing stairs. Some individuals may have slowly progressive difficulty walking as they grow older. Ultimately, some affected individuals have lost the ability to walk, but this usually does not occur before the 6th decade of life.
Some affected individuals may develop drooping of the upper eyelid (ptosis) and complete or partial paralysis of the muscles that control the movements of the eyes (ophthalmoplegia).WhenDNM2-related CNM occurs during infancy or early childhood common symptoms include hypotonia, generalized weakness, facial muscle weakness, ptosis, and ophthalmoplegia. Affected children may exhibit delays in attaining motor milestones, such as holding their head up. Facial weakness can cause infants to have a weak sucking ability and/or experience difficulties swallowing, potentially resulting in feeding difficulties. Eventually, affected individuals can develop breathing (respiratory) complications.
Additional symptoms have been reported in some individuals withDNM2-related CNM including cataracts, an increase in the size of skeletal muscle (muscle hypertrophy), a reduced jaw opening, a mildly high arch of the foot (pes cavus) and abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis). Contractures of the Achilles tendon can also occur. A contracture is defined as shortening or hardening of muscle or tendon tissue that causes deformity and restricts the movements of affected areas, especially the joints.
BIN1-RELATED CNMThis form of CNM is caused by mutations of theBIN1gene and is inherited as an autosomal recessive condition. The symptoms of this disorder can vary greatly from one person to another and the severity can range from mildly affected individuals to those with severe, life-threatening complications early in life. However, relatively few families withBIN1-related CNM have been reported to date and the full spectrum of manifestations may not be known yet.
BIN1-related CNM may be present at birth or during early childhood. Overall, the severity of muscle weakness can vary. Affected individuals have mildly progressive muscle weakness. Facial muscle weakness is usually present and affected infants or children may exhibit ptosis or ophthalmoplegia. The muscles used for chewing (mastication) may be particularly involved in some cases. Weakness predominantly affects the muscles of the upper arms and legs (proximally), but can potentially affect the muscles of the lower arms and legs as well (distally). Loss of muscle tissue mass (atrophy) may also occur. Some individuals will not experience respiratory involvement; others will experience potentially severe respiratory difficulties requiring ventilation. Feeding difficulties can also occur. Some individuals will experience delays in attaining developmental milestones such as sitting up, walking, or climbing stairs. In the severe form of BIN1-related CNM, progressive muscle weakness can result in difficulty walking and some individuals may lose the ability to walk unassisted by their 20s.
Individuals with early onsetBIN1-related CNM may develop distinctive facial features including a long face and a highly arched palate.
Affected individuals may also exhibit skeletal abnormalities including a high arch of the foot (pes cavus), clubfoot, joint contractures, and side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis) or abnormal front-to-back curvature of the spine (kyphosis).
Individuals with later onset ofBIN1-related CNM typically do not exhibit ophthalmoplegia and may not have distinctive facial features. These individuals usually develop mild, slowly progressive muscle weakness that particularly affects the proximal muscles of the arms and legs. Some individuals may go undiagnosed until adulthood because the symptoms are subtle and cause little difficulty.
RYR1-RELATED CNMMost cases of this form of CNM tend to fall somewhere in between the severe or mild ends of the CNM spectrum. Many affected infants are profoundly hypotonic and weak at birth. However, some of these infants may improve significantly over time. Muscle weakness predominantly affects the proximal and axial muscles. Feeding difficulties and frequent respiratory infections may affect infants with RYR1-related CNM. Delays in attaining developmental milestones such as walking and climbing stairs may also occur.
Most affected individuals have distinctive facial features such as a V-shaped mouth. Additional symptoms that have been reported include scoliosis, absent reflexes, ophthalmoplegia, and bilateral ptosis. Some individuals may develop contractures. In some cases, individuals who experience profound difficulties at birth improve and only have mild issues during their teen-aged years.
At least one male child withRYR1-related CNM developed a severe form of the disorder and was initially diagnosed with X-linked myotubular myopathy before being identified as having a mutation in theRYR1gene.

