Cerebrocostomandibular Syndrome

synonyms:
CCMSCCM Syndromerib gap defects with micrognathiacerebro-costo-mandibular syndrome

overview:
Cerebrocostomandibular syndrome (CCMS) is a disorder that involves a small chin (micrognathia), an opening in the roof of the mouth (cleft palate), a narrow chest, missing ribs, gaps between ribs, and breathing and feeding difficulties. Other common features include scoliosis, developmental delay or intellectual disability, and hearing loss. Other medical problems can be seen as well. Breathing difficulties can lead to death in childhood, and most babies born with CCMS need surgery in the first year of life to help them breathe. These surgeries can include inserting a breathing tube directly into the throat (tracheostomy), surgeries to make the jaw or chest larger, surgery to insert a feeding tube into the stomach, and surgery to repair the hole in the roof of the mouth. CCMS is caused by changes in theSNRPBgene. A damaging change in one of a person’s two copies of the gene can cause the disorder. Most of the time, these changes are new to a child, and do not show up in family members. Rarely, a parent may have the change as well, and may show no symptoms. The diagnosis of CCMS is usually made in the first year of life based on the clinical features (such as a small jaw, rib gaps, narrow chest, and/or breathing difficulties). Imaging techniques like X-ray or MRI may be needed to take a better look at the ribs and spine. Genetic testing can confirm the diagnosis and help parents to better understand the risk for having another child with the disorder.

symptoms:
CCMS is an extremely rare inherited disorder. Its features mainly stem from problems in how the jaw and ribs are formed. People with CCMS have a small jaw with a small chin and mouth (micrognathia). This can cause the tongue to be in the wrong position (glossoptosis). In turn, the abnormal position of the tongue can cause a gap to form in the roof of the mouth (cleft palate) during development in the womb. This set of features (micrognathia, glossoptosis, and cleft palate) is often called Robin sequence. These features can cause feeding difficulties. Nearly all people with CCMS have a small jaw, and most have cleft palate.
Individuals with CCMS have large gaps between some of their ribs, especially in the back of the ribcage near the spine. They are typically missing some ribs as well. In one study, people with CCMS had between 7 and 11 ribs per side instead of the typical 12. All had a least one gap on each side. Some patients had gaps between nearly all their ribs. Some of these gaps healed over time. In addition, the ribs of people with CCMS do not connect to the spine in the way they should (abnormal costotransverse articulation). Most people with CCMS also have narrow rib cages. The narrow rib cage and jaw problems can make it difficult for people with CCMS to breathe and eat. These problems usually need treatment in the first year of life. Previously, only about 50% of babies born with CCMS lived until their first birthday. However, treatments have improved, and now about 80% of babies with CCMS live to be at least one-year-old. Many people with CCMS can live full, productive lives.
Scoliosis is another common feature in CCMS, though it tends to develop during childhood rather than appearing in infants. Scoliosis may affect about half (50%) of people with CCMS. About half of these patients, or 25% of all CCMS patients, have severe scoliosis. The rib gaps in CCMS cause the scoliosis, but the number of rib gaps cannot predict how severe the scoliosis will be.
About half (50%) of people with CCMS have developmental delays or intellectual disability. These delays can often be explained by a lack of oxygen at birth. The delays can be mild, moderate or severe. Severe delays may be related to more severe health problems overall. In some very severe cases of CCMS, babies die within the first year of life. Extra skin at the back of the neck (called redundant neck skin or neck webbing) may be a sign of this more severe form of CCMS.
Some other features of CCMS include hearing loss, clubfeet, small head, and low weight and height. They can also have problems with the stomach, heart, kidneys, and urine and genital pathways. Conductive hearing loss occurs in about two thirds (67%) of people with CCMS, where problems in how the ears are formed prevents normal hearing. Another type of hearing loss, called sensorineural hearing loss, has been found in at least one person with CCMS. This involves a problem in how noise signals are sent from the ears to the brain. Around one third (31%) of patients with CCMS have a problem where stomach acid travels back up into the throat (gastroesophageal reflux disease, shortened to GERD in the US and GORD in the UK). About one fourth (25%) are born with a hole in the heart. Problems with the urinary and genital pathways include testicles that remain inside the body (cryptorchidism) or a block in the anus (anal stenosis).
During pregnancy, some features of CCMS may be found by ultrasound. Around one fourth (19%) of people with CCMS in one study had a small jaw (micrognathia) on ultrasound. Some other ultrasound findings included slow growth (intrauterine growth restriction, or IUGR), extra amniotic fluid (polyhydramnios), and a thicker pocket of fluid at the back of the baby’s neck (thickened nuchal translucency). If this pocket of fluid becomes very large, it may be called a cystic hygroma. Extra fluid at the back of the neck while in the womb can lead to extra neck skin at birth, and may be linked to more severe problems in babies with CCMS.

