Cerebrotendinous Xanthomatosis

synonyms:
cerebral cholesterinosisCTXsterol 27-hydroxylase deficiency

overview:
Summary
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX) is a rare autosomal recessive genetic disorder caused by an abnormality in theCYP27A1gene, resulting in a deficiency of the mitochondrial enzyme sterol 27-hydroxylase. The lack of this enzyme prevents cholesterol from being converted into a bile acid called chenodeoxycholic acid. Deposits of cholesterol and a related compound called cholestanol accumulate in the nerve cells and membranes potentially causing damage to the brain, spinal cord, tendons, lens of the eye and arteries. Affected individuals can experience diarrhea and cataracts in childhood and may develop benign, fatty tumors (xanthomas) of the tendons during adolescence. If untreated, CTX can lead to progressive neurologic problems such as seizures, cognitive impairment, and difficulties with coordination and balance (ataxia). Coronary heart disease is common. Some individuals with the later-onset symptoms of CTX experienced cholestatic jaundice during infancy. The specific symptoms and progression of this disorder can vary greatly from one individual to another, even for twins with the same abnormality in theCYP27A1gene. Long-term therapy with chenodeoxycholic acid has been effective in treating affected individuals.

Introduction
CTX was first described in the medical literature in 1937. CTX is classified as a bile acid synthesis disorder (due to the underlying genetic mutation that causes deficiency in an important enzyme in the bile acid synthesis pathway; sterol 27-hydroxylase). Bile acids (chenodeoxycholic and cholic acid) are mostly synthesized in the liver. They are an important component of bile and help the intestine to absorb fats. The disorder can also be classified as a lipid storage disorder (due to fat deposition in various tissues of the body) or a leukodystrophy (due to the involvement of central nervous system white matter).

symptoms:
The presentation of CTX is highly variable and is associated with a wide range of potential abnormalities. Originally, the disorder was believed only to be a neurological disorder of abnormal fat (lipid) storage not associated with liver disease. It is now known that CTX can occasionally present in childhood with cholestatic liver disease that can be severe or can be mild and resolve on its own in individuals who may later develop other complications of the disorder such as neurological disease. Cholestatic liver disease refers to the interruption or suppression of the flow of bile from the liver (cholestasis). Features of cholestasis include yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes and whites of the eyes (jaundice), failure to thrive, and growth deficiency. Enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly) and/or spleen (splenomegaly) may also occur.
Generally, systemic symptoms develop earlier than neurologic symptoms. The first symptom may be chronic diarrhea in infancy. Diarrhea is often resistant to treatment (intractable). Infantile spasms have also been reported as a possible symptom. Juvenile cataracts in the first decades of life are often an initial symptom of CTX. Tendinous xanthomas (fatty tumors) may appear in the second or third decade and can be located on the Achilles tendon, extensor tendons of the elbows and hands, and the knees.
Most affected individuals experience a decline in mental function beginning at puberty, but some show impairment beginning in childhood. Cognitive impairment can be mild to severe. CTX is often diagnosed through neurological symptoms of the disease that will continue to get worse without treatment. Seizures and epilepsy have been reported as symptoms. Psychiatric abnormalities including behavioral changes, hallucinations, agitation, aggression, depression, and suicidal tendencies can also occur, although specific expression varies greatly. Increased muscle tone and stiffness (spasticity) can occur.
In some patients, additional neurologic findings may occur including impaired coordination of voluntary movements due to underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the brain’s cerebellum (cerebellar ataxia); symptoms that resemble Parkinson disease (atypical parkinsonism); and dystonia, which is a general term for a large group of movement disorders that vary in their symptoms, causes, progression, and treatments. Dystonia is generally characterized by involuntary muscle contractions that force the body into abnormal, sometimes painful, movements and positions (postures).
Cardiovascular disease has been reported in individuals with CTX, although the exact prevalence of this finding is unknown. Hardening of the arteries (atherosclerosis) and coronary heart disease may occur. Additional symptoms that have been reported include underactivity of the thyroid (hypothyroidism) and skeletal abnormalities such as porous, brittle bones (osteoporosis) and a higher incidence of bone fractures.

