Cervical Teratoma

synonyms:
primary thyroid teratoma

overview:
Cervical teratomas are extremely rare germ cell tumors (neoplasm) that occur in the neck. The majority of teratomas occur in the testes or ovaries (gonads) or the lower back (sacrococcygeal region). In rare cases, other areas such as the neck may be affected. Most cervical tumors occur in children and are non-cancerous (benign). In extremely rare cases, cervical teratomas occur in adults and are usually cancerous (malignant).
The term “cancer” refers to a group of diseases characterized by abnormal, uncontrolled cellular growth that invades surrounding tissues and may spread (metastasize) to distant bodily tissues or organs via the bloodstream, the lymphatic system, or other means. Different forms of cancer are be classified based upon the cell type involved, the specific nature of the malignancy, and the disease’s clinical course.
Teratomas are germ cell tumors that, in rare cases, occur in the head and neck region. Some researchers differentiate between cervical and primary thyroid teratomas. For a diagnosis of primary thyroid teratoma one of three conditions must be met: a tumor must occupy a portion of the thyroid gland, a direct connection must exist between the tumor and the thyroid, or a teratoma is accompanied by the absence of the thyroid. However, most cervical teratomas have some type of relationship with the thyroid and the clinical picture and prognosis between these tumors is the same. Therefore, many researchers have abandoned separating these tumors and classify all neck teratomas as cervical teratomas.

symptoms:
Symptoms of cervical teratomas may vary from case to case. The tumors may be non-cancerous (benign) or cancerous (malignant). Cervical teratomas are more common in children than adults. In children they are usually benign; in adults they are usually malignant.
The specific symptoms associated with cervical teratomas in children vary depending upon the size of the tumor. Small tumors may not cause any symptoms (asymptomatic). However, a large teratoma may cause disfigurement and compress nearby structures such as the windpipe (trachea). Such large tumors may cause additional symptoms including a wheezing or whistling sound when breathing (stridor), difficulty breathing, or shortness of breath (dyspnea). These tumors can also compress the esophagus, inhibiting swallowing. Eventually, compression of vital structures may cause life-threatening complications such as respiratory distress.
Cervical teratomas in adults are extremely rare. In most cases, they are malignant and may spread (metastasize) to nearby lymph nodes and other organs of the body, especially the lungs. As in children, cervical teratomas in adults can compress nearby structures such as the windpipe resulting in respiratory distress and additional symptoms.

