Chanarin-Dorfman Syndrome

synonyms:
Chanarin-Dorfman diseaseneutral lipid storage disease type ICGI58 deficiencydisorder of cornification 12 (neutral lipid storage type)DOC 12 (neutral lipid storage type)Dorfman Chanarin syndromeichthyosiform erythroderma with leukocyte vacuolationichthyotic neutral lipid storage diseasetriglyceride storage disease impaired long-chain fatty acid oxidationCDS

overview:
Summary

Chanarin-Dorfman syndrome (CDS) is an extremely rare genetic disorder characterized by dry, scaly skin at birth as well as progressive fatty liver disease and various degrees of muscular involvement. Vision problems, hearing loss, short stature and mild intellectual disability are also associated with this condition. The skin abnormalities are present at birth but the disease is often diagnosed a few years later in childhood when more symptoms become apparent. The current treatment options are limited, mostly for the skin symptoms. An early initiation of low fat diet with MCT (medium chain triglycerides) might improve the liver condition. Motor rehabilitation is necessary in patients with muscle disease (myopathy).

Introduction

Chanarin-Dorfman syndrome was first described in 1974 in Jerusalem. Over 128 CDS patients have been reported worldwide, especially in the Mediterranean and Middle East area. CDS is a type of neutral lipid storage disease, but is also a considered a hereditary skin disease in the ‘ichthyotic’ group. It is named according to the first researchers who described patients: M.L Dorfman in 1974 and I. Chanarin in 1975.

symptoms:
Chanarin-Dorfman syndrome can affect many systems. All patients have skin findings that are usually present at birth: redness, fine scaling, dark pigmentation and severe itching which leads to scratching and skin-picking (excoriation). The skin appearance is referred to “ichthyosiform nonbullous erythroderma”. Patients also have liver disease with lipid storage which can lead to liver failure. About 60% of patients also have muscle problems. They have slowly progressive weakness of the proximal arms and legs. When the muscles are affected they release their enzymes in the blood, which can be detected by the presence of a CK elevation. Exercise intolerance has never been reported, but many patients reported early fatigability.
Less commonly, other systems can be involved. Around 40% of patients have eye problems consisting mainly in cataracts or eyelids pointing outwards (ectropion). Approximately 25% of patients have progressive hearing loss. Around 25% have cognitive impairment. Short stature and growth retardation have also been reported. Some patients have intestinal problems such as fatty diarrhea (steatorrhea) and enlarged spleen. Some have orthopedic problems and kidney dysfunction.

