Chediak Higashi Syndrome

synonyms:
Begnez-Cesar's SyndromeChediak-Steinbrinck-Higashi SyndromeCHSLeukocytic Anomaly AlbinismNatural Killer Lymphocytes, Defect inOculocutaneous Albinism, Chediak-Higashi Type

overview:
Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS) is a rare, inherited, complex, immune disorder that usually occurs in childhood characterized by reduced pigment in the skin and eyes (oculocutaneous albinism),  immune deficiency with an increased susceptibility to infections, and a tendency to bruise and bleed easily. Neurological deficits are also common. CHS is transmitted as an autosomal recessive genetic condition.

symptoms:
The symptoms of CHS may be apparent during early infancy. Hair is typically blond or light brown with a silvery tint. Affected children may be abnormally sensitive to light (photosensitivity) because of the reduced pigment in the eyes and skin, and may exhibit rapid, involuntary, eye movements (nystagmus). More important and more serious are the effects of CHS on the patient’s immune and nervous systems.
In CHS, white blood cells contain abnormal granules that are markedly enlarged. These granules can be seen by looking at the blood cells under the microscope, and if present, are diagnostic of CHS. These abnormal granules affect the ability of the white blood cells to fight infection. Children are susceptible to frequent bacterial, viral, and fungal infections, particularly of the skin and respiratory tract. Children with CHS can also have abnormally low levels of white blood cells. Children with this disorder may bruise easily or bleed excessively when injured. Platelet numbers are usually normal, but the platelets do not function properly causing easy bruising or prolonged bleeding.
The disease can be categorized into classic and atypical (mild) forms. Individuals with the atypical form may have fewer or less severe, infections and milder symptoms. Children with the classic form of the disease are at risk for developing the accelerated phase. The accelerated phase occurs in up to 85% of patients and can occur at any age. The accelerated phase is caused by an excess production of lymphocytes by the immune system. Patients can develop symptoms such as fever, swollen lymph nodes, enlargement of the liver and spleen, anemia, low WBC count, and low blood platelet count. This is a serious condition and needs to be treated right away.
Neurological symptoms occur in early adulthood. Symptoms involving the nervous system include an unsteady posture and walk (ataxia) and loss of sensation in the arms and legs (peripheral neuropathy).This can progress to physical weakness and disability. Some patients can have symptoms that resemble Parkinson’s disease.

