Chiari Malformations

synonyms:
Arnold-Chiari Malformation (ACM)CMHindbrain HerniationTonsillar Ectopia

overview:
Summary
Chiari malformations are a group of complex brain abnormalities that affect the area in lower posterior skull where the brain and spinal cord connect. The underlying anatomy of Chiari malformations is thought to be present at birth (congenital), although in many cases they may not become clinically apparent until adulthood. In extremely rare cases, a Chiari malformation may be acquired during life. The exact cause of Chiari malformations are not known, but often the cavity near the base of the skull (posterior fossa) is narrow and abnormally small in relation to the size of the cerebellum, which this portion of the skull encloses. Researchers believe that in some cases the small posterior fossa may cause the developing brain, specifically the cerebellum and the brainstem, to be pushed downward. Part of the cerebellum (known as the cerebellar tonsils) may protrude (herniate) through the foramen magnum, which is the normal opening found in the occipital bone at the base of the skull. The tonsils may thus interfere with the flow of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to and from the skull and spinal canal, potentially leading to accumulation of cerebral spinal fluid in the subarachnoid spaces of the brain and spine. A Chiari malformation can also cause pressure on the brain and produce hydrocephalus (pressure due to excessive cerebrospinal fluid accumulation in the brain) and the spinal cord, potentially causing a wide variety of symptoms. In fact, no two cases of Chiari malformation are exactly alike and the associated symptoms are highly variable. The severity of Chiari malformations can vary dramatically as well. In some cases, affected individuals may not develop any symptoms (asymptomatic); in others, severe, potentially debilitating or life-threatening symptoms can develop.
Traditionally, Chiari malformations have been defined and classified by how much of the cerebellar tonsils protrude through the foramen magnum. A diagnosis of a Chiari malformation usually signifies that the cerebellar tonsils protrude below the foramen magnum (often cited as at least 5 millimeters, though this is controversial). However, researchers have determined that the length of tonsil descent in a Chiari malformation does not always correspond to the severity of symptoms or to the response to treatment. In fact, some individuals are classified as having Chiari malformation type 0, in which there is minimal or no descent of the cerebellar tonsils. These individuals still have symptoms associated with a Chiari malformation, most likely due to abnormalities in the flow of cerebrospinal fluid within the skull and spinal canal. Research is ongoing to understand the complex, underlying mechanisms that cause Chiari malformations.
Introduction
Chiari malformations are named for Hans Chiari, an Austrian pathologist, who first identified type I-III in 1891. Julius Arnold further expanded the definition of Chiari malformation type II and some medical sources began using the name Arnold-Chiari malformation. Nowadays, some medical sources use Arnold-Chiari malformation as a broad term for all forms. Chiari malformations have also been known as congenital tonsillar herniation, tonsillar ectopia or tonsillar descent.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of Chiari malformation can vary greatly from one person to another. Some individuals may not have any symptoms (asymptomatic) upon diagnosis as an incidental finding; others may have serious manifestations such as neurological deficits. Symptoms may go through periods of exacerbation and remission. Chiari malformations are highly variable conditions that will affect every individual person differently. Specific symptoms can occur in different combinations and generally reflect dysfunction of the cerebellum, the brainstem, the spinal cord and lower cranial nerves. It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
The most common symptom associated with a Chiari malformation is occipital headaches. These headaches are felt near the base of the skull and may radiate to cause pain in the neck and shoulders. They can be severe and may be described as sharp, brief, throbbing or pulsating. Occipital headaches can be brought on or worsened by coughing, straining or sneezing.
Abnormalities affecting the eyes can also affect individuals with a Chiari malformation including double vision (diplopia), abnormal sensitivity to light (photophobia), blurred vision, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus) and pain behind the eyes. Vertigo, dizziness, ringing in the ears (tinnitus) and bilateral hearing impairment can also develop.
Additional symptoms associated with a Chiari malformation may include poor coordination and balance problems, muscle weakness, difficulties swallowing (dysphagia) or speaking (dysarthria), palpitations, fainting episodes (syncope) and tingling or burning sensations in the fingers, toes or lips (paresthesias). Sleep disorders, especially sleep apnea and chronic fatigue, have also been described in individuals with Chiari malformations.
Affected individuals may also develop a fluid-filled cavity or cyst in the spinal cord (syrinx), a condition known as syringomyelia. This condition is chronic and a syrinx can expand over time. Syringomyelia can be associated with a variety of symptoms depending upon the size and specific location of the syrinx. Potential symptoms include loss of muscle mass, muscle weakness, numbness or decreased sensation especially to hot and cold, abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis), loss of bowel and bladder control, chronic pain, muscle contractions, uncoordinated movements (ataxia), and spasms and tightening of the muscles of the legs (spasticity).
Some individuals have a condition related to syringomyelia known as hydromyelia, which is characterized by abnormal widening of the central canal of the spinal cord (the small canal running through the center of the spinal cord). These small cavities are filled with cerebrospinal fluid and their significance, if any, is not known. Some physicians use the terms syringomyelia or hydromyelia interchangeably. However, hydromyelia cavities connect to the fourth ventricle (an area in the brain that normally contains cerebrospinal fluid). Hydromyelia may also be present in infants and young children with or without brain abnormalities, such as Chiari malformation type II. The fluid-filled cavities in cases of syringomyelia often do not connect to any other fluid-filled areas or spaces and occur more often in adults than children.
CHIARI MALFORMATION TYPE I
Chiari malformation type I is the most common cause of syringomyelia. It may not cause any symptoms and often goes unrecognized until adolescence or adulthood. Consequently, this form is sometimes referred to as adult Chiari malformation. Chiari malformation type I is usually not associated with other neurological abnormalities, although it can cause neurological symptoms due to compression of the brainstem and spinal cord.
CHIARI MALFORMATION TYPE II
Chiari malformation type II is usually more severe than type I and generally symptoms become apparent during childhood. The severity of Chiari malformation type II can vary greatly. The disorder can potentially cause severe, life-threatening complications during infancy or childhood.
In Chiari malformation type II, cerebellar tissue protrudes all the way into the spinal canal. Affected individuals may have some of the symptoms described above. However, additional findings such as hydrocephalus may also occur. Hydrocephalus is a condition in which accumulation of excessive cerebrospinal fluid in the brain ventricles causes pressure on the tissues of the brain. Hydrocephalus can cause an abnormally enlarged head (macrocephaly), vomiting, irritability, seizures, and delays in attaining developmental milestones. The specific symptoms associated with hydrocephalus can vary from one child to another.
Chiari malformation type II is almost invariably associated with a form of spina bifida, frequently presenting as myelomeningocele. Spina bifida is a birth defect due to incomplete closure of the posterior spinal cord and bony vertebral arch (lamina). Many cases with this anomaly leave a portion of the spinal cord exposed through the spinal canal, typically forming a sac filled with cerebrospinal fluid, meninges, and portions of the spinal cord and nerves (myelomeningocele). Myelomeningocele can be associated with partial or complete paralysis below the spinal opening, including lack of bladder and bowel control.
Chiari malformation type II can be associated with other significant neurological conditions including complex anomalies of the brain. Chiari malformation type II is sometimes referred to as pediatric Chiari malformation and requires surgical intervention during infancy or early childhood.
CHIARI MALFORMATION TYPE III
Chiari malformation type III is extremely rare and more severe than Chiari malformations types I and II. This form is associated with an encephalocele, a condition in which a portion of the brain and its surrounding membranes (meninges) protrude through a defect in the skull.
Affected individuals have many of the symptoms associated with Chiari malformation type II, but also have additional symptoms. Chiari malformation type III is often associated with debilitating and life-threatening complications in infancy.
CHIARI MALFORMATION TYPE IV
Unlike types I-III, Chiari malformation type IV is not associated with herniation of the brain through the foramen magnum. In this condition, the brain is underdeveloped (hypoplastic) or fails to develop (aplastic). Chiari malformation type IV is the most severe form and is usually fatal during infancy. Because of the lack of cerebellar tonsillar herniation, some researchers do not consider this condition a form of Chiari malformation.
CHIARI MALFORMATION TYPE 0
Researchers have determined that some individuals with a Chiari malformation have minimal or no herniation of the cerebellar tonsils through the foramen magnum. These individuals often have syringomyelia despite the lack of cerebellar tonsil herniation. Occipital headaches may also occur. Symptoms in these cases are most likely due to abnormalities in the flow of cerebrospinal fluid at the level of the foramen magnum at the skull base, although there is often no identifiable cause. Individuals with this condition have improved after decompression surgery. The addition of Chiari malformation type 0 as a classification for Chiari malformations is controversial; some physicians believe that, for a diagnosis of a Chiari malformation, tonsillar herniation must be present.

