Chilaiditi’s Syndrome

overview:
Chilaiditi’s syndrome is a rare condition in which a portion of the colon is abnormally located (interposed) in between the liver and the diaphragm. The diaphragm is the muscle that separates the chest cavity from the abdomen. Chilaiditi’s syndrome can cause a variety of symptoms including abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and small bowel obstruction. The specific symptoms and presentation of Chilaiditi’s syndrome can vary greatly from one person to another. The cause of Chilaiditi’s syndrome is not fully understood.
In most cases, interposition of a portion of colon between the liver and diaphragm does not cause symptoms (asymptomatic) and is often an incidental finding in the elderly. When no symptoms are present, this clinical finding is referred to as Chilaiditi’s sign. In rare cases, symptoms do develop; these cases are referred to as Chilaiditi’s syndrome.

symptoms:
The symptoms of Chilaiditi’s syndrome may vary from one person to another. The presentation and specific symptoms that develop can be significantly different. Chronic, recurrent episodes of abdominal pain are a common finding. Abdominal pain may be mild and come and go (intermittent). However, abdominal pain can be severe and force affected individuals to go to the emergency room.
Additional symptoms can occur with Chilaiditi’s syndrome. These symptoms can occur together in a wide variety of different combinations. Affected individuals will not have all of these symptoms and some affected individuals will not have any of these symptoms.
Additional symptoms that have been reported in Chilaiditi’s syndrome include nausea, vomiting, constipation, indigestion (dyspepsia), abnormal twisting of the intestines (volvulus) causing obstruction, abdominal swelling (distention), difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), and tenderness in the upper, central area of the abdomen (epigastric region). In some cases, Chilaiditi’s syndrome has been associated with breathing problems (respiratory distress).

