Cholesteryl Ester Storage Disease

synonyms:
acid cholesteryl ester hydrolase deficiency, type 2CESDcholesterol ester hydrolase deficiencyLAL deficiency, CESD type

overview:
SummaryCholesteryl ester storage disease (CESD) is a type of lysosomal acid lipase (LAL) deficiency; a rare genetic disorder characterized by a deficiency of the lysosomal acid lipase (LIPA or LAL) enzyme. This enzyme is essential for hydrolysis of triglycerides and cholesteryl esters in lysosomes. Deficiency of the LIPA enzyme causes accumulation of certain fatty substances (mucolipids) and certain complex carbohydrates (mucopolysaccharides) within the cells of many tissues of the body, potentially causing a variety of symptoms. In the liver, the consequences are abnormally enlarged liver (hepatomegaly) due to hepatic steatosis (fatty liver) and fibrosis that can lead to micronodular cirrhosis. Some individuals may not be diagnosed with CESD until adulthood. CESD is caused by changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in the lysosomal acid lipase (LIPA) gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
IntroductionCESD and Wolman disease are the two types of lysosomal acid lipase deficiency.LIPAgene variants that cause CESD result in some enzyme activity, whereasLIPAgene variants that cause Wolman disease produce an enzyme with no residual activity or no enzyme at all. Genetic and biochemical evidence indicates that CESD and Wolman disease are distinguished by residual lysosomal acid lipase activity.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of CESD are highly variable. Some individuals may develop symptoms during childhood; others may have extremely mild cases that cause few symptoms. Still other individuals may not have any noticeable symptoms (asymptomatic) and may go undiagnosed until well into adulthood. It is important to note that affected individuals will not have all of the symptoms discussed below. The disorder often goes misdiagnosed or undiagnosed, making it difficult to determine its true frequency in the general population.
CESD is characterized by alterations of blood lipoprotein profile; patients present hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia, HDL deficiency with abnormal lipid deposition in many organs. The primary finding in many patients, and sometimes the only clinical sign, is thus a mixed hyperlipidemia with low HDL-cholesterol levels. Patients normally present with hepatomegaly, often apparent at birth or during early childhood. In rare cases, it may not become apparent until the second decade of life. Hepatomegaly usually becomes progressively worse, eventually causing scarring (fibrosis) of the liver. In approximately one-third of patients, the spleen may also be enlarged (splenomegaly).
In most patients, CESD is considered a benign condition, but in some patients, significant complications may eventually develop including fatty liver (liver steatosis), fibrosis and finally micronodular cirrhosis with liver failure and esophageal varices due to altered hepatic venous circulation. The vessels swell and sometimes may rupture, causing potentially life-threatening bleeding. Abnormal enlargement of the adrenal glands (adrenomegaly) may also occur in few individuals. The adrenal glands are located on top of the kidneys and produce two hormones called epinephrine and norepinephrine. Other hormones produced by the adrenal glands help to regulate the fluid and electrolyte balance in the body. In rare cases, hardening of adrenal gland tissue due to the accumulation of calcium (calcification) may occur, but this finding is much more common in Wolman disease than in CESD.

