Choroiditis, Serpiginous

synonyms:
Geographic ChoroiditisGeographic ChoroidopathyGeographic Helicoid Peripapillary Choroidopathy (GHPC)Geographic Serpiginous ChoroiditisPeripapillary ChoroidopathySerpiginous Choroidopathy

overview:
Serpiginous Choroiditis is one of the conditions in a group termed the white dot syndromes which all involve inflammation of the retina and choroid and are defined by the appearance of white dots in the posterior inner part of the eye (fundus). Serpiginous Choroiditis is a rare recurrent eye disorder characterized by irregularly shaped (serpiginous) lesions involving two layers of the eye surface (the retinal pigment epithelium and the choriocapillaris). No symptoms are apparent unless a specific area of the retina (macula) is damaged. A sudden, painless decrease in vision in one or both eyes may be the first sign of Serpiginous Choroiditis. Patients may also notice blind gaps in the visual field (scotomata) or a sensation of flashes of light (photopsia). Both eyes are commonly affected, although the second eye may not develop lesions for weeks to years after the first eye. The exact cause of Serpiginous Choroiditis is not known.

symptoms:
Serpiginous Choroiditis is a rare disorder characterized by recurrent lesions affecting two layers of the eye (the retinal pigment epithelium and the choriocapillaris).  The retina is the light-sensitive internal coat of the eyeball, consisting of eight layers.  Seven of these layers contain nerves, and one layer contains pigmentation (retinal pigment epithelium).  The choroid is a vascular membrane located between the retina inside the eye and the “white” section on the outside of the eye (sclera).  The choriocapillaris is the layer of the choroid next to the retina.
Lesions usually begin at the back of the eye near the connection to the optic nerve (optic disk) and may then extend in any direction along the eye layers.  Lesions may also begin at other locations and spread toward the optic disk.  The disorder has two stages:  an acute stage during which lesions develop and/or spread, and a chronic stage during which the disease does not progress but inactive lesions lead to scarring, wasting of tissue (atrophy), and/or clumping of pigment.  Recurrences usually start in scar tissue left by old lesions.
Symptoms of Serpiginous Choroiditis appear only if a specific area of the retina (macula) is damaged.  A sudden, painless decrease in central vision in one eye may be the first noticeable sign of disease.  Blurred central vision and/or the sensation that something is obstructing central vision (positive scotoma) are characteristic symptoms.  Both eyes are commonly affected, although the second eye may not develop lesions for weeks to years after the first eye.  Vision outside center vision (peripheral) remains normal in most cases.  Recurrences are common for this condition.
A membrane composed of tiny fibers and blood vessels (subretinal neovascular membrane) may grow from the choriocapillaris and cause vision distortion and/or blurring in some people with Serpiginous Choroiditis.  If a neovascular membrane affects the macular region of the retina, central vision loss may occur.

