Chordoma

synonyms:
clival chordomafamilial chordomaintracranial chordomasacrococcygeal chordomaskull base chordomaspinal chordoma

overview:
Summary
A chordoma is a rare tumor that develops in the bones of the skull and the spine. These tumors arise from the remnants of the notochord, a flexible, rod-like structure that provides support to the developing embryo. During fetal development, the notochord is replaced by the bones of the spine. Notochordal cells that persist within the spinal column may give rise to chordoma. Chordomas are slow growing tumors that cause destruction of the surrounding bone and eventually extend into the surrounding soft tissue. Sometimes chordoma spreads through the bloodstream (metastasizes) to other organs, such as the lungs, lymph nodes, liver or other bones. Although chordoma can develop at any point during life, it most commonly occurs in older adults. The symptoms associated with a chordoma depend upon the size and location of the tumor. Almost all cases of chordoma occur randomly for no apparent reason. In extremely rare cases, chordomas may develop in multiple members of the same family as a result of certain genetic risk factors (familial chordoma).
Introduction
Chordomas may be classified as a type of sarcoma. Sarcoma is a general term for a group of cancers that can affect bone or connective tissue – the tissues that connect, support and surround various structures and organs in the body. Although chordomas are primary bone tumors, they are sometimes classified as central nervous system tumors when they occur near the skull base.

symptoms:
A chordoma can develop anywhere along the spine from the base of the skull to the tailbone (coccyx). The most common locations for a chordoma are at the triangular bone near the base of the spine (sacrum), the coccyx, and the clivus, which is a bone in the base of the skull. The clivus is located in front of the brainstem and behind the back of the throat.
Symptoms vary from one person to another and depend in part upon the location and size of the tumor. Chordomas located in the lower spine may be associated with lower back pain and tenderness, pain the legs, weakness and numbness in the lower back or legs, and abnormalities affecting the bladder and intestines including loss of bladder control (urinary incontinence) and/or loss of bowel control. In some cases, a mass may be felt (palpable) over the small of the back.
Chordomas of the skull base (cranial chordomas) can be associated with double vision (diplopia), headaches, and/or facial pain. Paralysis (palsy) of certain facial nerves can also occur, resulting in swallowing difficulties, speech and voice abnormalities, and abnormal eye movements.
In some cases, an intracranial chordoma can block the flow of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), causing CSF to accumulate in the skull and putting pressure on the brain (hydrocephalus). Hydrocephalus can cause several symptoms that differ based upon age. In infants, it can cause bulging at the soft spots on the skull, an increase in head circumference, and downward casting of the eyes (sunsetting). In older children, it can cause nausea, vomiting, sleepiness, double vision, rapid eye movements and difficulties with balance. In adults, it can also cause headaches, changes in personality, and difficulty focusing the eyes.
Chordomas in the area immediately below the skull (cervical spine) can cause neck pain, hoarseness, difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), and, less often, bleeding from the voice box (laryngeal bleeding).

