Chronic Intestinal Pseudo-Obstruction

synonyms:
chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudo-obstructionCIIPCIPpseudo-obstruction syndrome

overview:
Summary
Chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction (CIP) is a rare, potentially disabling gastrointestinal disorder characterized by abnormalities affecting the involuntary, coordinated muscular contractions (a process called peristalsis) of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Peristalsis propels food and other material through the digestive system under the control of nerves, pacemaker cells and hormones. CIP usually results from abnormalities affecting the muscles or nerves that are involved in peristalsis. Consequently, peristalsis becomes altered and inefficient. The symptoms of CIP resemble those caused by mechanical obstruction of the small bowel. Mechanical obstruction refers to something (such as a tumor, scar tissue, etc.) physically blocking the passage of food and other material through the GI tract. In individuals with CIP no such physical obstruction is present, hence the term pseudo-obstruction. Common symptoms include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, abdominal swelling (distention) and constipation. Ultimately, normal nutritional requirements cannot be met leading to unintended weight loss and malnourishment. CIP can potentially cause severe, even life-threatening complications.
Introduction
There is no agreed upon classification system for CIP and proposed classification systems tend to be complex and confusing. There are also many different causes of CIP, which only adds to the confusion. The unifying concept for CIP regardless of cause is an abnormality affecting the passage of food and other material through the digestive system (gastrointestinal motility). Generally, CIP is broken down into two main forms depending on whether the disorder involves the muscles (myopathic CIP) or nerves (neuropathic CIP) of the GI tract that are involved in peristalsis. Some researchers lump enteric dysmotility together with CIP. The prognosis of this separate yet similar condition is different from CIP. This report deals solely with the strict definition of CIP as a disorder that causes an “obstruction-like” picture.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms and severity of CIP can vary greatly from one person to another, depending, in part, on the exact location and extent of the disease within the gastrointestinal tract. Any area of the GI tract can potentially be affected, but the small bowel is most commonly affected. By definition, CIP is chronic in nature and individuals usually have continuous symptoms of bowel obstruction. However, affected individuals may also experience recurrent episodes or “acute attacks” during which time symptoms worsen and become more pronounced. In between such episodes, affected individuals may experience vague, nonspecific symptoms relating to the GI tract and bowel obstruction. In extremely rare cases, some affected individuals do not have symptoms in between such attacks.
It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below and that the severity of the disorder can vary dramatically. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
Children generally show symptoms of CIP at birth and may have a severe expression of the disorder. In less severe cases, symptoms may not develop until months later. Some symptoms may be intermittent and may only occur during an acute crisis or episode. In severe cases, CIP can potentially cause significant, life-threatening complications during infancy or early childhood.
Common symptoms include nausea and vomiting, abdominal swelling or bloating (distention), abdominal cramps, abdominal pain and constipation. Although constipation is more common, some affected individuals may experience a complete lack of bowel movements and have no gas in the GI tract (lack of flatus). Abdominal pain may be chronic in some cases while in other cases it may only occur during acute episodes. Abdominal pain has been described as either sharp or stabbing versus a dull ache or general discomfort. Some infants and children may also experience early fullness (satiety), an aversion to food and eating, and unintended weight loss or poor weight gain. Over time, bacterial infections and poor absorption of nutrients (malabsorption) may occur, ultimately resulting in malnutrition. Less often, diarrhea may occur, most likely due to bacterial infection.
The progression and natural history of CIP is not well studied in adults. Most likely, affected individuals have vague, non-specific gastrointestinal complaints for years before a diagnosis of CIP is suspected. Recurrent and severe abdominal pain may be the most common symptom in adults. Adults may also experience nausea and vomiting, constipation, and abnormal swelling or bloating of the abdomen. Unintended weight loss and loss of appetite may also develop. Eventually, affected individuals may experience bacterial infections, malabsorption and malnutrition.  In severe cases, affected individuals can develop cachexia – a physical wasting syndrome characterized by loss of weigh and muscle mass.
In both children and adults additional symptoms can occur. Involvement of the esophagus can result in difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), chest pain and heartburn. In some cases, CIP may affect the urinary tract or bladder causing symptoms such as widening of the small tubes that carry urine from the kidneys (ureters) and difficulty urinating (dysuria). This occurs more often in myopathic CIP than in neuropathic CIP.

