Chromosome 21 Ring

synonyms:
r21Ring 21Ring 21, Chromosome

overview:
Chromosome 21 Ring is a rare chromosomal disorder in which the affected infant has a breakage of chromosome 21 at both ends, and the ends of the chromosome join together to form a ring. The amount of genetic material lost at the two ends of the chromosome may vary. As a result, an infant with very little absent genetic material may have no apparent symptoms while an infant with a significant part of the chromosomal ends missing may have many symptoms. When symptoms of the disorder are present, the affected infant may have mental retardation as well as abnormalities of the face, eyes, skeleton, and/or internal organs.

symptoms:
The symptoms and findings associated with Chromosome 21 Ring may be extremely variable, depending upon the amount and location of genetic material lost from the 21st chromosome and other factors.  As a result, some individuals with Chromosome 21 Ring may have few or no associated symptoms, whereas others may have severe physical abnormalities and mental retardation.
In some cases, the features associated with Chromosome 21 Ring may resemble those seen in individuals with other disorders of chromosome 21, such as Chromosome 21 Monosomy or Down Syndrome (also known as Chromosome 21 Trisomy).  (For further information on these chromosomal disorders, please see the “Causes” and “Related Disorders” sections of this report below.)
Additional features have also been reported in association with Chromosome 21 Ring, such as growth delays, abnormally diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), and malformations of the head and facial (craniofacial) area.  For example, craniofacial abnormalities may include an unusually small head (microcephaly) or improper development of midfacial regions due to failed division of certain brain regions during embryonic development (holoprosencephaly).  (For further information, please use “holoprosencephaly” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)  Eye abnormalities may also be present, such as defective development (dysgenesis) of certain regions near the front of the eye (anterior segment); dislocation of the lens; or incomplete development (hypoplasia) of the nerve (i.e., optic nerve) that transmits impulses from the nerve-rich innermost layer of the eye (retina) to the brain.  The degree of potential visual impairment depends upon the severity and combination of eye abnormalities present.  Reports suggest that some individuals with Chromosome 21 Ring may also have an increased predisposition to respiratory, sinus, or other forms of infection.  In addition, in some cases, other physical abnormalities may be present, such as skeletal defects or malformations of certain internal organs (visceral anomalies).
Although some individuals with Chromosome 21 Ring have normal intelligence, others may have varying levels of mental retardation.  The disorder may also be characterized by delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and physical activities (psychomotor retardation), including impaired speech and language skills.
According to reports in the medical literature, individuals with Chromosome 21 Ring, including those without any apparent symptoms, may have an increased incidence of infertility or pregnancy loss.

