Chromosome 18q- Syndrome

synonyms:
18q Deletion Syndrome18q- SyndromeChromosome 18 Long Arm Deletion SyndromeChromosome 18, Monosomy 18QDel(18q) SyndromeMonosomy 18q Syndrome

overview:
Chromosome 18q- syndrome (also known as Chromosome 18, Monosomy 18q) is a rare chromosomal disorder in which there is deletion of part of the long arm (q) of chromosome 18. Associated symptoms and findings may vary greatly in range and severity from case to case. However, characteristic features include short stature; mental retardation; poor muscle tone (hypotonia); malformations of the hands and feet; and abnormalities of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region, such as a small head (microcephaly), a “carp-shaped” mouth, deeply set eyes, prominent ears, and/or unusually flat, underdeveloped midfacial regions (midfacial hypoplasia). Some affected individuals may also have visual abnormalities, hearing impairment, genital malformations, structural heart defects, and/or other physical abnormalities. Chromosome 18q- syndrome usually appears to result from spontaneous (de novo) errors very early during embryonic development that occur for unknown reasons (sporadically).

symptoms:
As noted above, associated symptoms and findings may vary from case to case.  However, many infants with the disorder have a low birth weight and growth delays after birth, resulting in short stature.  In addition, Chromosome 18q- syndrome is often characterized by low muscle tone (hypotonia); sudden episodes of uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain (seizures); moderate to severe delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and physical activities (psychomotor retardation); and varying degrees of mental retardation.  Evidence suggests that most individuals with the disorder are affected by profound, severe, or moderate mental retardation.  However, mild mental deficiency has been reported in some cases.  In addition, some affected children may have behavioral problems, such as abnormally increased activity (hyperactivity), aggressive behavior, and tantrums.
Chromosome 18q- syndrome is also typically associated with malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region.  Characteristic craniofacial findings may include an unusually small head (microcephaly); flat, underdeveloped (hypoplastic) midfacial regions; deeply set eyes; a “carp-shaped” mouth; and/or relative protrusion of the lower jaw (mandibular prognathism).  Some affected individuals may also have a broad nasal bridge; incomplete closure (clefting) or unusual narrowness of the roof of the mouth (palate); and/or an abnormal groove in the upper lip (cleft lip).
Chromosome 18q- syndrome is also often characterized by additional eye (ocular) defects, such as vertical skin folds that may cover the eyes’ inner corners (epicanthal folds); involuntary, rhythmic, rapid eye movements (nystagmus); and/or abnormal deviation of one eye in relation to the other (strabismus).  Associated ocular defects may also include abnormally small eyes (microphthalmia); partial absence of ocular tissue from the colored region of the eyes (coloboma of the iris); clouding of the normally transparent front region of the eyes (corneal opacities); defects of the retinas and optic disks; and/or other ocular abnormalities.  (The retina is the nerve-rich membrane upon which images are focused at the back of the eye; its specialized nerve cells convert light into nerve impulses that are transmitted to the brain via the optic nerve.  The optic disk, also known as the “blind spot,” is the region where fibers of the retina become part of the optic nerve.)  Such ocular defects may result in varying degrees of visual impairment.
Some individuals with Chromosome 18q- syndrome may also have malformations of the ears.  These may include unusually prominent ears and/or abnormally narrow (stenotic) or absent (atretic) external ear canals, with associated hearing impairment.
Chromosome 18q- syndrome is also often associated with distinctive abnormalities of the hands and feet, including long, thin, tapered hands; abnormal skin ridge patterns on the fingers and palms; abnormal placement of the thumbs and certain toes; and/or deformities in which the feet are twisted out of shape or position (clubfeet).  Some affected individuals may also have rib malformations, hip deformities, and/or other skeletal defects.  In addition, abnormal dimples may be present in certain regions, including over the knuckles and the sides of the knees.
Individuals with Chromosome 18q- syndrome may also have genital abnormalities.  In affected females, there may be underdevelopment of the skin folds surrounding the vaginal opening (hypoplastic labia).  In males with the disorder, genital malformations may include undescended testes (cryptorchidism); an abnormally small penis (micropenis) and scrotum; and/or abnormal placement of the urinary opening (hypospadias), such as on the underside of the penis.
Additional physical abnormalities have also been reported in association with the disorder, such as widely spaced nipples; deficiency of a particular antibody (i.e., immunoglobulin A [IgA]) that helps the body to fight certain infections; kidney (renal) defects; and/or other findings.  In addition, in over 30 percent of cases, congenital heart defects may be present.  Such heart defects have included an abnormal opening in the fibrous partition (septum) that normally separates the upper chambers (atria) or the lower chambers (ventricles) of the heart (atrial or ventricular septal defects); abnormal narrowing (stenosis) of the opening between the pulmonary artery and the right ventricle (pulmonary stenosis); or patent ductus arteriosus (PDA).  In PDA, the channel that is present between the pulmonary artery and the aorta during fetal development fails to close after birth.  (The pulmonary artery transports oxygen-poor blood from the right ventricle to the lungs, where the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide occurs.  The aorta, the major artery of the body, arises from the left ventricle and supplies oxygen-rich blood to most arteries.)  In some individuals with Chromosome 18q- syndrome, additional physical abnormalities may also be present.

