Chromosome 8, Monosomy 8p

synonyms:
8p- Syndrome, PartialChromosome 8, 8p Deletion Syndrome, PartialChromosome 8, Partial Deletion of Short ArmChromosome 8, Partial Monosomy 8pDel(8p) Syndrome, PartialDistal 8p MonosomyPartial 8p MonosomyTerminal 8p- Syndrome (8p21 to 8p23-pter), Included

overview:
Chromosome 8, Monosomy 8p is a rare chromosomal disorder characterized by deletion (monosomy) of a portion of the eighth chromosome. Associated symptoms and findings may vary greatly in range and severity from case to case. However, common features include growth deficiency; mental retardation; malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region, such as a small head (microcephaly) and vertical skin folds that may cover the eyes’ inner corners (epicanthal folds); heart (cardiac) abnormalities; and/or genital defects in affected males. Additional craniofacial features may also be present that tend to become less apparent with age, such as a short, broad nose; a low, wide nasal bridge; and/or a small jaw (micrognathia). In most cases, Chromosome 8, Monosomy 8p appears to result from spontaneous (de novo) errors very early in embryonic development that occur for unknown reasons.

symptoms:
As noted above, associated features may be extremely variable.  However, in many cases, there are growth delays during fetal development (intrauterine growth retardation) as well as after birth (postnatal growth retardation).
The syndrome is also commonly associated with mild mental retardation, although more severe retardation may be seen in some instances.  In addition, other cases have been described in which affected individuals have normal intelligence.  Monosomy 8p may also be characterized by delays in the acquisition of skills that require the coordination of mental and motor activities (psychomotor retardation).  According to reports in the medical literature, many affected children may have speech difficulties.  In addition, behavioral problems are commonly seen during childhood, such as abnormally active (hyperactive), impulsive behavior and/or outbursts of aggressiveness.
Monosomy 8p is also typically characterized by craniofacial malformations that may be relatively subtle in some cases.  In addition, a few cases have been reported in which such malformations are not apparent.  Craniofacial features commonly seen with the syndrome include an unusually small head (microcephaly); a narrow skull and high forehead; low-set and/or malformed ears; and/or vertical skin folds that may cover the eyes’ inner corners (epicanthal folds).  As noted above, additional craniofacial abnormalities may also be present that may become less evident with age.  Such features may include a flat, wide nasal bridge; a broad, short nose; a small, receding jaw (microretrognathia); and/or other abnormalities.
In addition, many affected individuals may have an unusually short neck; a broad chest; and/or widely set, underdeveloped (hypoplastic) nipples.  Males with the syndrome may also have genital abnormalities, such as a developmental defect in which the testes have failed to descend into the pouchlike structure known as the scrotum (cryptorchidism); deficient activity of the testes (hypogonadism); and/or abnormal placement of the urinary opening (hypospadias), such as on the underside of the penis.
In many cases, Monosomy 8p is also characterized by various structural malformations of the heart that are present at birth (congenital heart defects).  Such defects may include an abnormal opening in the wall (septum) that separates the two lower or the two upper heart chambers (ventricular or atrial septal defects) or where the wall between the atria joins the wall between the ventricles (atrioventricular septal defect), allowing some oxygen-rich blood to recirculate through the lungs and potentially leading to rising blood pressure in the lungs (pulmonary hypertension).
In some cases, additional cardiac defects may be present, such as underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the right ventricle; abnormal narrowing (stenosis) of the opening between the pulmonary artery and the right ventricle (pulmonary stenosis); and/or other abnormalities.  (The pulmonary artery carries oxygen-depleted blood from the right ventricle to the lungs, where the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide occurs.  The aorta, the major artery of the body, arises from the left ventricle and supplies oxygen-rich blood to most arteries.)
In those with congenital heart defects, associated symptoms and findings may vary, depending on the size, nature, and/or combination of heart malformations present and other factors.  Some individuals may show no apparent symptoms (asymptomatic).  However, in other cases, symptoms and findings may include difficulties feeding, poor growth, difficult or labored breathing (dyspnea), profuse sweating, recurrent lung infections, an impaired ability of the heart to pump blood efficiently to the lungs and the rest of the body (heart failure), bluish discoloration of the skin and mucous membranes (cyanosis), enlargement of the heart, and/or other abnormalities.  In severe cases, congenital heart disease may lead to potentially life-threatening complications.

