Chromosome 15, Distal Trisomy 15q

synonyms:
Chromosome 15, Trisomy 15q2Distal Duplication 15qPartial Duplication 15q Syndrome

overview:
Chromosome 15, Distal Trisomy 15q is an extremely rare chromosomal disorder in which the end (distal) portion of the long arm (q) of the 15th chromosome (15q) appears three times (trisomy) rather than twice in cells of the body. The disorder is characterized by growth delays before and/or after birth (prenatal and/or postnatal growth retardation); mental retardation; and/or distinctive malformations of the head and facial (craniofacial) area. Additional abnormalities typically include an unusually short neck; malformations of the fingers and/or toes; abnormal sideways curvature of the spine (scoliosis) and/or other skeletal malformations; genital abnormalities, particularly in affected males; and/or, in some cases, heart (cardiac) defects. The range and severity of symptoms and physical findings may vary from case to case, depending upon the length and location of the duplicated portion of chromosome 15q. In most cases, Chromosome 15, Distal Trisomy 15q is due to a chromosomal balanced translocation in one of the parents.

symptoms:
In individuals with Chromosome 15, Distal Trisomy 15q, an extremely rare chromosomal disorder, the end (distal) portion of the long arm (q) of chromosome 15 (15q) is duplicated (trisomic).  Symptoms and physical characteristics associated with the disorder may vary in range and severity, depending upon the exact size and location of the duplicated portion of chromosome 15q.
In some cases, Chromosome 15, Distal Trisomy 15q may be characterized by abnormally slow growth before and/or after birth (prenatal and/or postnatal growth retardation) .  In addition, many affected infants experience swallowing and feeding difficulties that may be due to the presence of certain malformations of the head and facial (craniofacial) area.  Such feeding and swallowing difficulties may result in or contribute to an affected infant’s failure to grow or gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive).  However, in certain rare cases (i.e., trisomy 15q25-qter), affected individuals may exhibit abnormally tall stature.  (For more information on trisomy 15q25-qter, see the “Causes” section below.)
Most infants with Chromosome 15, Distal Trisomy 15q also exhibit abnormally diminished muscle tone (hypotonia).  In addition, most affected infants and children have severe to profound mental retardation.  However, in rare cases (i.e., trisomy 15q25-qter), only mild mental retardation may be present.
Many infants and children with the disorder have characteristic malformations of the head and facial (craniofacial) area.  In some cases, the fibrous joints between certain bones in the skull (sagittal sutures) close prematurely (craniosynostosis), causing the head to appear abnormally long and narrow (dolichocephaly).  In addition, in many cases, the head may appear abnormally small (microcephaly), with abnormal bulging (prominence) of the back of the head (occiput) and a sloping forehead.  In addition, the face may appear dissimilar from one side to the other (facial asymmetry).  In rare cases (i.e., trisomy 15q25-qter), affected infants may have hydrocephalus, a condition characterized by inhibition of the normal flow of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) within and abnormal widening (dilatation) of the cerebral spaces of the brain (ventricles), causing accumulation of CSF in the skull and potentially increased pressure on brain tissue.
Additional craniofacial malformations typically associated with the disorder may include downwardly slanting, short, and/or narrow eyelid folds (palpebral fissures); drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis); an abnormally large, prominent, and/or rounded (bulbous) nose with a broad nasal bridge; and/or an unusually small, triangular mouth.  In addition, many affected infants and children may have an abnormally long groove in the upper lip (philtrum), a crease in the center (midline) of the lower lip, a highly arched roof of the mouth (palate), an unusually small jaw (micrognathia), and/or abnormally round, “puffy” cheeks.  In some cases, the ears may be abnormally large, low-set, and/or malformed (dysplastic).  In addition, the neck may be short and/or webbed, which, in some cases, may be due to malformations of certain bones in the upper portion of the spine (cervical vertebrae).  Approximately one third of affected infants and children may also experience episodes of uncontrolled electrical disturbances in the brain (seizures).
In addition, most infants and children with Chromosome 15, Distal Trisomy 15q have skeletal abnormalities affecting the fingers, toes, chest (thorax), and/or spine.  Affected individuals may have unusually long, thin fingers and/or toes (arachnodactyly), permanently flexed fingers (camptodactyly), and/or excessive extension (hyperextension) of the thumbs.  In addition, the joints of the hands and feet may become fixed in a permanently flexed position (joint contractures).  Affected individuals may also have side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis) and/or abnormal depression of the sternum, the bone forming the center of the chest (“funnel chest” or pectus excavatum).
In many cases, individuals with Chromosome 15, Distal Trisomy 15q also have genital abnormalities.  In males, such abnormalities may include failure of the testes to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism) and/or low levels of testicular function (hypogonadism), resulting in delayed development of secondary sexual characteristics (i.e., deepening of the voice, characteristic hair growth patterns, sudden increase in growth and development of the testes and scrotum, etc.).  Some affected females may exhibit underdevelopment of the two long folds of skin on either side of the vaginal opening (labia majora).
In addition, many affected infants may have abnormalities of the heart (congenital heart defects) and/or may exhibit an increased susceptibility to recurrent respiratory tract infections.  In some cases, swallowing and feeding difficulties may cause food to be inhaled (aspirated) into the lungs, which may result in severe lung infections (aspiration pneumonia).  In some cases, such abnormalities may result in life-threatening complications.

