Chromosome 13, Partial Monosomy 13q

synonyms:
13q- Syndrome, PartialDeletion 13q Syndrome, PartialMonosomy 13q, PartialPartial Monosomy of the Long Arm of Chromosome 13

overview:
Chromosome 13, Partial Monosomy 13q is a rare chromosomal disorder in which a portion of the long arm (q) of chromosome 13 is missing (deleted or monosomic). The range and severity of symptoms may vary greatly, depending upon the exact size and location of the deletion on 13q. Chromosome 13, Partial Monosomy 13q is usually apparent at birth and may be characterized by low birth weight, malformations of the head and facial (craniofacial) area, abnormalities of the eyes, defects of the hands and/or feet, genital malformations in affected males, and/or additional physical abnormalities. Affected infants and children may also exhibit delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and muscular activity (psychomotor retardation) as well as varying degrees of intellectual disability. In the majority of cases, Chromosome 13, Partial Monosomy 13q appears to occur randomly, for no apparent reason (sporadic).

symptoms:
In Chromosome 13, Partial Monosomy 13q, a rare chromosomal disorder, a portion of the long arm (q) of chromosome 13 is missing (deleted). Symptoms and physical characteristics associated with the disorder may vary greatly, depending upon the exact size and location of the deletion (monosomy) on chromosome 13q.
In many cases, infants with Chromosome 13, Partial Monosomy 13q have a low birth weight and may fail to grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Moderate to severe growth delays may continue during childhood, resulting in short stature. In addition, in most cases, affected individuals exhibit a severe delay in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and muscular activity (psychomotor retardation). Severe intellectual impairment is also present in most cases. However, in some affected individuals, the degree of intellectual disability may be mild or moderate.
Many infants with Chromosome 13, Partial Monosomy 13q may exhibit characteristic abnormalities of the head and facial (craniofacial) area such as an unusually small head (microcephaly); a wide, flat nasal bridge; a small lower jaw (micrognathia) with an abnormally prominent upper jaw (maxilla); protruding front teeth (incisors), large, low-set ears; and/or a short neck with abnormal skin folds (webbing). In some cases, in addition to exhibiting microcephaly, some affected infants may experience premature closure (craniosynostosis) of the fibrous joints (metopic sutures) between the two sides of the bone in the forehead (frontal bone). As a result, the head may have an unusual “triangular-shaped” appearance with a prominent forehead (trigonocephaly). Affected children with trigonocephaly may be at risk for abnormal development of the forebrain (holoprosencephaly). (For more information on this condition, choose “Holoprosencephaly” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
In rare, severe cases, additional craniofacial abnormalities may include incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate) and/or a vertical groove in the upper lip (cleft lip). (For more information on these conditions, choose “Cleft Palate and Cleft Lip” as your search terms in the Rare Disease Database.)
Many infants and children with Chromosome 13, Partial Monosomy 13q also exhibit various eye (ocular) abnormalities. These often include unusually small eyes (microphthalmia), widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism), drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis), and/or vertical skin folds on either side of the nose (epicanthal folds) that may partially cover the eyes’ inner corners. Affected individuals may also exhibit abnormal clouding of the lens of the eye (cataract) and/or the front (anterior), clear portion of the eye through which light passes (corneal opacity). In addition, some tissue from the colored portion of the eye (iris) may be absent (coloboma), giving the iris a “keyhole” appearance. Colobomas may also affect other eye tissues (i.e., the choroid). Such eye abnormalities may result in varying degrees of visual impairment or, in some cases, blindness. The degree of visual impairment depends upon the severity and/or combination of eye abnormalities present.
In some cases, infants and children with Partial Monosomy 13q may also exhibit a malignant tumor of the retina (retinoblastoma), the nerve-rich membrane lining the eyes. In such cases, both eyes are usually affected (bilateral retinoblastoma). Symptoms associated with retinoblastoma may include the appearance of a whitish mass in the pupil area behind the lens of the eye (leukokoria or “cat’s eye reflex”), crossed eyes (strabismus), diminished vision or blindness, pain and redness, and/or an abnormal buildup of pressure of the fluid of the eye (secondary glaucoma).
Some individuals with Chromosome 13, Partial Monosomy 13q may also have malformations of the hands and/or feet. These may include underdeveloped (hypoplastic) or absent thumbs; fifth fingers that are abnormally bent (clinodactyly), webbing or fusion of certain fingers (syndactyly), unusually short big toes; and/or feet that are twisted in an abnormal position (talipes equinovarus or clubfoot). In some cases, affected individuals may exhibit additional skeletal abnormalities. These may include malformations of the ribs, abnormalities of bones in the spinal column (vertebrae), and/or sideways curvature of the spine (scoliosis).
In some cases, males with Chromosome 13, Partial Monosomy 13q may have genital abnormalities. For example, the urinary opening (meatus) may appear on the underside of the penis (hypospadias), and/or the testes may fail to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism). In some cases, the scrotum may be unusually small and/or abnormally divided into two sections (bifid scrotum); the penis may be unusually small (micropenis), and/or an abnormal passage may be present between the scrotum and the anus (perineal fistula). In rare cases, the anal opening may be absent or covered by a thin membrane, causing obstruction (anal atresia).
In some severe cases, individuals with Chromosome 13, Partial Monosomy 13q may also exhibit abnormalities of certain internal organs including the heart, brain, intestines, and/or kidneys.
In some cases, heart malformations may be associated with Partial Monosomy 13q including Atrial and Ventricular Septal Defects, which are rare heart defects that are present at birth (congenital). The normal heart has four chambers with two upper chambers known as atria. They are separated from each other by a fibrous partition known as the atrial septum. The two lower chambers of the heart are known as ventricles and are separated from each other by the ventricular septum. Valves connect the atria (left and right) to their respective ventricles. A small opening between the two atria (foramen ovale) is present at birth. Shortly after birth, the atrial septum gradually closes and covers this opening. In infants with Atrial Septal Defects, the atrial septum may not close properly or may be malformed during fetal development. As a result, the opening between the atria persists long after it should be closed, causing an increase in the workload on the right side of the heart and excessive blood flow to the lungs.
Most children with Atrial Septal Defects exhibit no symptoms. However, in some cases, associated symptoms may include abnormal thinness, mild growth delays, and an increased susceptibility to repeated respiratory infections. In rare cases, severely affected children may experience breathlessness, easy fatigability with exercise, and/or irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias).
Ventricular Septal Defects are characterized by an abnormal opening in the fibrous partition separating the two ventricles (ventricular septum). The size and location of the defect determine the severity of the symptoms. Small Ventricular Septal Defects may close on their own (spontaneously) or become less significant as the child matures and grows. Moderately-sized defects may affect the ability of the heart to pump blood efficiently to the lungs and the rest of the body (congestive cardiac failure). Symptoms associated with cardiac failure may include an abnormally rapid rate of breathing (tachypnea), wheezing, an unusually fast heartbeat (tachycardia), abnormal enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly), and/or failure to thrive. Large Ventricular Septal Defects can cause life-threatening complications during infancy. Persistent elevation of the pressure within the artery that carries blood away from the heart and to the lungs (pulmonary artery) can cause permanent damage to the lungs.
As mentioned above, affected infants with trigonocephaly may be at risk for abnormal development of the forebrain (holoprosencephaly). In some cases of Chromosome 13, Partial Monosomy 13q, additional brain abnormalities may be present such as absence (agenesis) of certain portions of the brain (e.g., rhinencephalon and/or corpus callosum), protrusion of membranes that surround the brain (meninges) through an abnormal opening in the skull (meningocele), and/or an abnormal accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid in the skull, causing increased pressure on the brain (hydrocephaly).
In addition, some individuals with Partial Monosomy 13q may also have Hirschsprung’s Disease, a disorder in which absence of nerve fibers (ganglia) in the muscle wall of the colon prevents the muscles from working to push waste materials (feces) through the lower digestive tract (peristalsis) . As a result, feces accumulate abnormally in the involved portion of the colon, causing massive widening (dilatation) of the colon (megacolon), diarrhea, constipation, abdominal distention, nausea, periodic vomiting, and/or loss of appetite (anorexia). (For more information on this disorder, choose “Hirschsprung” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
In rare cases, some individuals with Partial Monosomy 13q may also exhibit kidney (renal) abnormalities. These may include underdevelopment (hypoplasia) or absence (agenesis) of a kidney.

