Chromosome 3, Trisomy 3q2

synonyms:
Chromosome 3, Distal 3q2 DuplicationChromosome 3, Distal 3q2 TrisomyPartial Duplication 3q SyndromePartial Trisomy 3q Syndrome

overview:
Chromosome 3, Trisomy 3q2 is a rare chromosomal disorder in which a portion of the 3rd chromosome appears three times (trisomy) rather than twice in cells of the body. Associated symptoms and findings may be variable, depending upon the specific length and location of the duplicated (trisomic) portion of chromosome 3. However, many affected infants and children have developmental delays, mental retardation, and characteristic abnormalities of the head and facial (craniofacial) area, resulting in a distinctive facial appearance. Such craniofacial abnormalities may include a relatively short head (brachycephaly), widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism), upwardly slanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures), and a small nose with upturned nostrils (anteverted nares). Affected infants and children also tend to have long eyelashes; arched, bushy, well-defined eyebrows that grow together across the base of the nose (synophrys), an unusually low hairline on the forehead and the back of the neck; and generalized excessive hair growth (hirsutism). Chromosome 3, Trisomy 3q2 may also be characterized by eye (ocular) abnormalities, limb defects, structural heart malformations (congenital heart defects), or other physical features.

symptoms:
The symptoms and physical findings associated with Chromosome 3, Trisomy 3q2 may be variable.  However, in many cases, the disorder is characterized by mental retardation, moderate to severe developmental delays, abnormally diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), distinctive abnormalities of the head and facial (craniofacial) area, and/or additional physical abnormalities.  According to reports in the medical literature, craniofacial features and other physical abnormalities associated with Trisomy 3q2 are often very similar to those associated with a rare genetic disorder known as Cornelia de Lange syndrome.  (For further information on Cornelia de Lange syndrome, please see the “Related Disorders” section of this report below.)
Many infants with Trisomy 3q2 have characteristic craniofacial abnormalities.  Such features may include a relatively short, wide head (brachycephaly); widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); upwardly slanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures), and vertical skin folds covering the eyes’ inner corners (epicanthal folds).  Affected infants may also have a relatively small nose with upturned nostrils (anteverted nares), a thin upper lip, downwardly turning corners of the mouth, a small, receding lower jaw (microretrognathia), and an abnormally prominent vertical groove (philtrum) between the nose and the upper lip.  In addition, there may be incomplete closure (clefting) or abnormally high arching of the roof of the mouth (palate).  Affected infants and children may also have a low hairline on the forehead and the back of the neck, an abnormally short neck with excessive skin folds, unusually long eyelashes; arched, bushy, well-defined eyebrows that grow together across the base of the nose (synophrys), and generalized excessive hair growth (hirsutism).
Many infants with Chromosome 3, Trisomy 3q2 may also have eye (ocular) abnormalities, such as increased fluid pressure within the eyes (glaucoma); loss of transparency of the lenses (cataracts), clouding of the front, usually transparent regions of the eyes (corneal opacities), or rapid, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus).  Additional ocular abnormalities may include deviation of one eye in relation to the other (strabismus), absence or defects of ocular tissue (colobomata) involving the colored regions of the eyes (irides); or abnormal smallness of the eyes (microphthalmia).  Due to such features, affected individuals may have varying degrees of visual impairment.
Trisomy 3q2 may also be characterized by abnormalities of the fingers or toes.  For example, there may be underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of certain bones within the ends of the fingers (distal phalanges), causing the hands to appear unusually short.  Affected individuals may also have inward deviation or bending (clinodactyly) of certain fingers or toes (digits), permanent flexion of one or more digits (camptodactyly), or webbing or fusion (syndactyly) of certain toes.
Some infants and children with Trisomy 3q2 may also have additional physical abnormalities.  Genital defects may sometimes be present, such as undescended testes (cryptorchidism) in affected males and malformations of the internal genitals in females with the disorder.  In some cases, additional abnormalities may include structural malformations of the heart at birth (congenital heart defects), kidney (renal) defects, or underdevelopment of certain regions of the brain.

