Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia

synonyms:
chronic lymphoid leukemiaCLLSLL (small lymphocytic lymphoma)

overview:
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a malignant blood disorder in which there are an increased number of white blood cells in the lymphoid tissue. In CLL, the abnormal lymphocytes, also called leukemic cells, are produced instead of healthy white blood cells, and then accumulate over time. As the number of unhealthy blood cells grows, there is less room for healthy cells. The combination of fewer healthy cells and the fact that the CLL lymphocytes are poor at fighting infections can lead to frequent infection, anemia, and easy bleeding. This disease progresses slowly, and the uncontrolled buildup and enlargement of lymphoid tissue can occur in various sites of the body such as the lymph nodes, spleen, bone marrow, and lungs. CLL is the most common type of leukemia in adults and very rarely occurs in children. In the majority of individuals, chronic lymphocytic leukemia is the result of a rapid production of B lymphocyte cells (a type of white blood cell that is responsible for the production of antibodies to help fight infection). What was previously called CLL derived from T lymphocytes has been renamed as another disorder, T cell prolymphocytic leukemia. The overgrowth of cells in this T-cell disease tends to be much faster. The ability to distinguish between cells that have unmutated IgVH (Ig-unmutated CLL) and mutated IgVH (Ig-mutated CLL) has become very important in predicting the course of the disease (prognosis). Patients who have Ig-unmutated CLL have a much shorter time to treatment and historically a shorter average survival period compared to Ig-mutated CLL patients, whose average survival period exceeded 25 years even before the advent of modern therapy. These survival times however are based on much older data and are certainly longer now, with improved therapies. The other major determinant of prognosis is the chromosome makeup of the CLL, with particular concern about two higher risk chromosome abnormalities, loss of the short arm of chromosome 17 or the long arm of chromosome 11Determining the subset of CLL based on IGVH status is important because it is very predictive of prognosis. Because CLL usually progresses so slowly, many patients do not need immediate treatment and some do not even require it in their lifetime. Treatment is still based primarily on symptoms or worsening blood counts, not on these prognostic factors.

symptoms:
Approximately 50-75% of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia have no symptoms when first diagnosed. The disease is discovered during a routine exam or blood test. Symptoms can be similar between the two subdivisions of CLL, Ig-mutated and Ig-unmutated, although when Ig-unmutated CLL progresses, typically sooner, more symptoms may ensue.
Symptoms of chronic lymphocytic leukemia may include fatigue, weight loss, loss of appetite (anorexia), labored breathing, low-grade fever, a feeling of fullness in the abdomen due to an enlarged spleen, and night sweats. Bacterial infections such as skin infections, fluid and inflammation of the lungs (pneumonia), and inflammation of the sinuses (sinusitis) often occur. As the disorder advances, the patient loses the ability to fight off infections. Viral infections become an increasing concern.
In the later stages of the disorder, the liver, spleen, and lymph nodes may steadily increase in size. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia may also invade other tissues such as the skin, eye socket (orbit), mucous membrane that lines the inside of the eyelids (conjunctivae), lungs, sacs that line the chest (pleura), heart, and gastrointestinal tract. Swelling and a yellow pigment of the skin (jaundice) may also occur.
The National Cancer Institute has published a six-step description of the staging of this disorder. The staging determines the treatment and management plan.
Stage 0: An abundance of lymphocytes in blood but no other sign of leukemia; lymph nodes, spleen, liver, red blood cells and platelets are normal.
Stage I: Too many lymphocytes; lymph nodes swollen; spleen and liver are normal as are erythrocytes and platelets.
Stage II: Too many lymphocytes; lymph nodes, spleen and/or liver swollen.
Stage III: Too many lymphocytes; too few red blood cells (anemia); lymph nodes swollen; spleen and/or liver may be swollen.
Stage IV: Too many lymphocytes; too few platelets (difficult blood clotting); lymph nodes, spleen and liver may be swollen; too few red blood cells (anemia).
Refractory: CLL does not respond to standard treatments.

