Chromosome 22 Ring

synonyms:
r(22)ring 22ring 22, chromosome - Phelan-McDermid syndrome (individuals with a ring 22)

overview:
Ring chromosome 22 is a rare genetic condition that occurs when one chromosome 22 forms a circular or ring, structure. The ring forms after loss (deletion) of genetic material from both the short arm and long arm of chromosome 22. The size of the deletion is variable, ranging from less than 100kb to greater than 10Mb. The clinical features are also variable but typically include developmental delay, poor muscle tone (hypotonia), severe speech delay and minor physical features such as large ears and bulbous nose. The ring chromosome typically occurs de novo, meaning that it is a new event in the child and was not inherited. Chromosome studies and genetic counseling are indicated for parents of a child with a ring chromosome to determine if the ring was inherited and to provide important information about what the ring will mean for the development and medical care of their child.  People with ring 22 are at risk of developing neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2). Treatment is directed to the specific signs and symptoms that the affected person has.

symptoms:
The first indication that a child has ring chromosome 22 may be poor muscle tone (hypotonia). An infant may have trouble feeding, holding their head up and staying in a sitting position. As the child grows, other motor milestones such as crawling and walking will be delayed and the child may exhibit poor coordination, lack of balance and an unsteady gait. Moderate to profound intellectual disability is common, as is severely delayed or absent speech. Autism or autistic-like behavior is frequently seen. Mood disorders and other behavioral issues including aggression and hyperactivity have also been described.
Physical features of ring chromosome 22 are mild. They include bulbous nasal tip, broad nasal bridge, large ears and long eyelashes. Small head size (microcephaly) was reported as a common feature in early reports, but larger studies have found this to occur in less than 35% of individuals with ring 22. In about 10% of individuals, brain imaging studies show abnormalities of the central nervous system including dilation of the ventricles, atrophy (decrease in size) of the cerebellum and cerebrum, large cisterna magnum, meningiomas and brain tumors. Meningiomas and brain tumors may be indicative of neurofibromatosis type 2. Individuals with ring 22 are at risk of developing neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2). NF2 is a genetic condition characterized by the growth of non-cancerous tumors in the nervous system. The gene for NF2 is on the long arm of chromosome 22, near the segment that is deleted in ring 22. In NF2, tumors may occur along the nerve that carries information from the inner ear to the brain leading to hearing loss, ringing in the ears and loss of balance. Since many individuals with ring 22 have limited speech, they may not be able to tell their parents or caregivers that they have these symptoms. Tumors can also occur elsewhere in the brain leading to additional complications. For this reason, individuals with ring 22 should be monitored for signs of NF2 beginning at age 10-12, as discussed in “Related Disorders”.

