Chronic Granulomatous Disease

synonyms:
CGDchronic dysphagocytosischronic granulomatous diseasecongenital dysphagocytosisfatal granulomatous disease of childhoodgranulomatosis, chronic, familialgranulomatosis, septic, progressiveimpotent neutrophil syndrome

overview:
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is a rare inherited primary immune deficiency disorder that affects certain white blood cells (neutrophils, monocytes, macrophages, eosinophils). The disorder is characterized by an inability to resist infections caused by certain types of bacterial and fungal species and a tendency to develop chronic inflammation. Life-threatening recurrent fungal and bacterial infections affecting the skin, lungs, liver and bones may occur. In addition, patients can develop swollen areas of inflamed tissues known as granulomas that can be widely distributed, as well as other inflammatory conditions, including those involving the gastrointestinal tract.  Symptoms usually begin in infancy or childhood. Individuals with mild forms of the disorder may not develop symptoms until the teens or adulthood. Chronic granulomatous disease is a genetic disorder caused by changes (variants or mutations) in genes responsible for producing an important enzyme in white blood cells. Certain white blood cells use this enzyme to produce hydrogen peroxide that these cells need to kill certain bacteria and fungi and to properly regulate white blood cell responses to inflammation. These oxidants also regulate white blood cell pathways involved in the immune response and inflammation even in the absence of infection. Thus, patients with CGD have problems with both infections and increased inflammation.

symptoms:
Chronic granulomatous disease is characterized by a susceptibility to repeated bacterial and fungal infections. CGD can also be associated with the development of granulomatous lesions of the skin, lungs, bones and lymph nodes formed by collections of inflammatory white blood cells. Excess gamma globulin in the blood (hypergammaglobulinemia), low levels of circulating red blood cells (anemia), an increase in white blood cells (leukocytosis) can occur as a result of repeated infections or chronic inflammation. Evidence of chronic infections may be seen in the liver, gastrointestinal tract, brain and eyes.
There is usually a history of repeated infections, including inflammation of the lymph glands (suppurative lymphadenitis), skin infections and pneumonia. Blood studies can show evidence of chronic infection. There may also be a persistent runny nose (rhinitis), inflammation of the skin (dermatitis) and an inflammation of the mucous membranes of the mouth (stomatitis). Gastrointestinal problems can also occur, including diarrhea, abdominal pain, colitis and perianal abscesses.
Infection of the bones (osteomyelitis), brain abscesses, obstruction of the genitourinary tract and/or gastrointestinal tract due to the formation of granulomatous tissue and delayed growth are also symptomatic of chronic granulomatous disease. Abnormal enlargement of the liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly) may also occur. Chronic lung inflammation can develop in young adults with CGD.

