Chromosome 11, Partial Trisomy 11q

synonyms:
11q Partial TrisomyChromosome 11, Partial Trisomy 11q13-qterChromosome 11, Partial Trisomy 11q21-qterChromosome 11, Partial Trisomy 11q23-qterDistal Trisomy 11qPartial Trisomy 11qTrisomy 11q, Partial

overview:
Chromosome 11, Partial Trisomy 11q is a rare chromosomal disorder in which the end (distal) portion of the long arm (q) of the 11th chromosome appears three times (trisomy) rather than twice in cells of the body. Although associated symptoms and findings may vary, the disorder is often associated with delayed growth before and after birth (prenatal and postnatal growth retardation); varying degrees of mental retardation; distinctive abnormalities of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region; and/or other features. Chromosomal analysis is necessary for a definite diagnosis.

symptoms:
Chromosome 11, Partial Trisomy 11q is commonly characterized by growth retardation before and after birth, delayed acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and motor activities (psychomotor retardation), mild to moderate mental retardation, and distinctive craniofacial abnormalities.
In individuals with Partial Trisomy 11q, craniofacial abnormalities may include an abnormally small head (microcephaly) that may appear unusually short and broad (brachycephaly); a short nose; low-set ears; and/or incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate) or a highly arched palate.  Many affected individuals also have abnormal pits or depressions and/or outgrowths of skin and cartilage in front of the ears (preauricular pits or tags); a small jaw (micrognathia); a retracted lower lip; and/or an unusually long vertical groove in the center of the upper lip (philtrum).  Additional craniofacial features may sometimes include widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); downwardly slanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures); vertical skin folds over the eyes’ inner corners (epicanthal folds); and/or abnormal deviation of one eye in relation to the other (strabismus).  In addition, in some cases, one side of the face may appear smaller than or relatively dissimilar to the other (facial asymmetry).
In some affected individuals, Chromosome 11, Partial Trisomy 11q may also be associated with additional physical findings.  These may include skeletal abnormalities, such as malformation of the collarbone (clavicular defect) and/or dislocation or improper development (dysplasia) of the hips; structural malformations of the heart that are present at birth (congenital heart defects); and/or underdevelopment or absence of the band of nerve fibers that normally joins the two hemispheres of the brain (hypoplasia or agenesis of the corpus callosum).  Additional abnormalities that have been reported in association with Partial Trisomy 11q have included an unusually short neck; abnormal looseness of the skin (cutis laxa); abnormal creases on the palms of the hands; or undescended testes (cryptorchidism) and/or an unusually small penis (micropenis) in affected males.

