Chronic Eosinophilic Pneumonia

synonyms:
Carrington's diseaseCEPICEPidiopathic chronic eosinophilic pneumonia

overview:
Summary

Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia (CEP) is a rare disorder characterized by the massive accumulation of eosinophils in the lungs (pulmonary eosinophilia). Eosinophils are a type of white blood cell and are part of the immune system. They are usually produced in response to allergens, inflammation or infection (especially parasitic ones) and are particularly active in the respiratory tract. In CEP, eosinophils also accumulate in the bloodstream (peripheral eosinophilia). Common symptoms include shortness of breath (dyspnea), cough, fatigue, night sweats, low grade fevers, and unintended weight loss. The exact cause of CEP is unknown (idiopathic).

Introduction

CEP was first described as a distinct entity in the medical literature by Carrington, et al. in 1969 when they described nine individuals with the disorder. It is classified as a form of eosinophilic lung disease, a large group of interstitial lung diseases. CEP is different from acute eosinophilic pneumonia (AEP), which is marked by rapid onset, the absence of asthma, a greater potential for acute respiratory failure and no relapse following treatment. For more information on AEP, choose “acute eosinophilic pneumonia” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.

symptoms:
Symptoms of CEP are general and nonspecific. The disorder is chronic and slowly progressive with symptoms usually developing insidiously over weeks or months. Breathing (respiratory) difficulties are always present in some form and can include progressive shortness of breath (dyspnea) and a nonproductive cough. Dyspnea can range from mild to severe. Wheezing occurs in approximately 50% of individuals. Some individuals may cough up a mixture of saliva and mucus (sputum).
Additional symptoms associated with CEP include abnormal weakness or lack of energy (asthenia), night sweats, low grade fevers, and unintended (and sometimes marked) weight loss. Less frequently, a general feeling of poor health (malaise), chills, and chest pain may occur.
Some individuals with CEP have pre-existing asthma or a history of allergies. The exact percentage of individuals with pre-existing asthma is unknown and estimates in the medical literature vary greatly, ranging anywhere from one-third to two-thirds of affected individuals. Airway obstruction associated with such conditions tends to worsen in individuals with CEP. In some cases, individuals with no history of asthma or allergies developed the conditions after developing CEP. Asthma associated with CEP is often severe. Approximately 75% of individuals with CEP experience asthma at some point during their lives.
Additional non-respiratory symptoms in individuals with CEP are uncommon. However, joint pain, nerve damage and general skin or gastrointestinal symptoms have been reported in the medical literature.
CEP tends to recur and many individuals will relapse at some point, especially when therapy is not maintained. A relapse can occur as much as 10 years or more after the initial episode. Some individuals eventually develop severe asthma. In some cases, individuals with CEP have developed a related disorder known as Churg-Strauss syndrome, suggesting that there may be an overlap between these two disorders. For more information on Churg-Strauss syndrome see the Related Disorders section below.

