Chromosome 10, Monosomy 10p

synonyms:
10p deletion syndrome (partial)chromosome 10, 10p- partialchromosome 10, partial deletion (short arm)

overview:
Chromosome 10, monosomy 10p is a rare chromosomal disorder in which the end (distal) portion of the short arm (p) of chromosome 10 is missing (deleted or monosomic). The range and severity of symptoms and findings may be variable, depending upon the exact size or location of the deletion on chromosome 10p. However, associated features often include severe intellectual disability; growth delays after birth (postnatal growth retardation); distinctive malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region; a short neck; and/or structural defects of the heart that are present at birth (congenital heart defects). Several cases have also been reported in which affected individuals have some features of DiGeorge syndrome (DGS). DGS is a congenital disorder characterized by underdevelopment or absence of the thymus and parathyroid glands, potentially causing abnormalities of the immune system, deficient production of parathyroid hormone (hypoparathyroidism), a heart defect, and associated findings. In many cases, chromosome 10, monosomy 10p appears to occur spontaneously (de novo) for unknown reasons.

symptoms:
The symptoms and physical findings associated with chromosome 10, monosomy 10p may vary in range and severity from case to case. However, according to reports in the medical literature, most individuals with the disorder are affected by severe intellectual disability and delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and motor activities (psychomotor retardation). Monosomy 10p is also frequently associated with growth delays after birth, resulting in short stature.
Affected infants and children also typically have certain distinctive abnormalities of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region. Such malformations may include an abnormally small head (microcephaly) with a protruding forehead (frontal bossing); a small jaw (micrognathia); a low nasal bridge and upturned (anteverted) nostrils; malformed, low set ears; and a short neck. Additional craniofacial defects may also be present, such as widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); short, downwardly slanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures); vertical skin folds covering the eyes’ inner corners (epicanthal folds); drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis); and abnormal deviation of one eye in relation to the other (strabismus). Less commonly, the disorder may be associated with incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate) and an abnormal groove in the upper lip (cleft lip).
Individuals with monosomy 10p may also have widely spaced nipples; foot malformations; and/or structural defects of the heart (congenital heart defects). In addition, the disorder may be associated with abnormalities of the urinary tract and the genitals, such as undescended testes (cryptorchidism) and an underdeveloped (hypoplastic) scrotum in affected males. Some individuals may also have dysfunction of the lowest region of the brain known as the brainstem, which helps to convey messages traveling between other brain regions and the spinal cord and has sensory, motor, and reflex functions. In individuals with monosomy 10p, brainstem dysfunction may be associated with severe hearing loss due to impaired conversion of sound vibrations and failed transmission of nerve impulses from the inner ear via the auditory nerve to the brain (i.e., sensorineural hearing loss).
As mentioned previously, monosomy 10p may often be associated with features of DiGeorge syndrome (DGS). DGS is a congenital disorder resulting from improper development of embryonic structures that form the thymus and parathyroid glands. Other embryonic structures that develop at about the same time may also sometimes be affected, potentially leading to certain defects of the heart and its major blood vessels (cardiovascular defects) and/or craniofacial malformations. The thymus is thought to play a crucial role in the body’s immune system beginning during fetal development until about puberty. It serves to promote the maturation of certain precursor* cells into T lymphocytes, which are specialized white blood cells that assist in the recognition or destruction of foreign proteins (antigens), such as certain invading microorganisms. (*A precursor is a biological forerunner or a substance that precedes and is the source of another, typically more mature or active substance.) The parathyroid glands are two pairs of relatively small glands that produce parathyroid hormone, which helps to regulate blood calcium levels.
Individuals with monosomy 10p who have features of DGS typically have variable degrees of hypoplasia or underdevelopment of the thymus and parathyroid glands. This is sometimes referred to as “partial DiGeorge syndrome.” Hypoplasia of the thymus may lead to deficient activity of the immune system and impaired resistance to certain viral, bacterial, or fungal infections. In other cases, however, some individuals with partial DiGeorge syndrome may not appear to have an increased susceptibility to recurrent infections.
In those with hypoplasia of the parathyroid glands, deficient secretion of parathyroid hormone (hypoparathyroidism) may lead to low calcium blood levels (hypocalcemia) and associated findings during the first days of life (neonatal tetany). Such features may include muscle cramping and spasms, convulsions, tremors, spasmodic closure of the larynx (laryngospasm), and/or other findings.
Cardiovascular abnormalities that have been reported in association with DGS include defects of the aorta or the major artery that supplies oxygenated blood to most of the body; an abnormal opening in the fibrous partition (septum) that separates the lower or upper chambers of the heart (ventricular or atrial septal defects); and/or other congenital defects.
Experts suggest that certain abnormalities frequently seen in individuals with monosomy 10p may be absent in those with classic DiGeorge syndrome (i.e., DGS that results from minute deletions of material from the long arm of chromosome 22). For example, severe intellectual disability and growth delays are seen in most individuals with monosomy 10p yet may not be apparent in those with classic DGS. Sensorineural deafness, a finding reported in a number of individuals with monosomy 10p, has not been associated with classic DGS. In addition, abnormalities of the heart and its major blood vessels are more frequent in classic DGS than monosomy 10p. (For further information, please see the “Causes” section of this report below.)

