Chromosome 3, Monosomy 3p

synonyms:
Chromosome 3, Deletion of Distal 3pChromosome 3, Distal 3p MonosomyMonosomy 3p

overview:
Chromosome 3, Monosomy 3p is a rare chromosomal disorder in which the end (distal) portion of the short arm (p) of chromosome 3 is missing (deleted or monosomic). The range and severity of symptoms and findings may be variable. However, associated features often include growth delays before and after birth (prenatal and postnatal growth deficiency); severe to profound mental retardation; distinctive malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region; eyebrows that grow together (synophrys); and/or excessive hair growth (hypertrichosis). Additional physical abnormalities may also be present. In many cases, Chromosome 3, Monosomy 3p appears to occur spontaneously (de novo) for unknown reasons.

symptoms:
As noted above, the symptoms and physical findings associated with Chromosome 3, Monosomy 3p may vary in range and severity from case to case.  However, according to reports in the medical literature, many affected individuals have a low birthweight; marked growth delays after birth (postnatal growth retardation); severe to profound mental retardation; severe delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and motor activities (psychomotor retardation); excessive hair growth (hypertrichosis); and/or distinctive malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region.
Many affected infants have an abnormally small head (microcephaly) that may appear unusually short and broad (brachycephaly); a flat back region of the head (occiput); and/or an abnormally high, narrow, prominent forehead.  Additional craniofacial abnormalities may include a triangular face; arched eyebrows that grow together (synophrys); a broad, flat nose; an unusually long vertical groove in the middle of the upper lip (philtrum); thin lips; and/or an abnormally small lower jaw (mandible).  Affected individuals may also have a downwardly turned mouth; widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); vertical skin folds that cover the eyes’ inner corners (epicanthal folds); upwardly slanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures); drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis); and/or low-set, malformed ears.
Chromosome 3, Monosomy 3p is also commonly associated with more than the normal number of fingers and/or toes (polydactyly).  In many cases, there may be additional fingers, particularly duplication of the “pinkies” or fifth fingers (postaxial polydactyly).  In addition, in some instances, affected infants may have duplication of certain toes, particularly the fifth toes.
Reports indicate that some affected individuals may also have hearing loss and/or visual impairment.  In addition, the disorder may be associated with additional physical features, such as abnormal forward (anterior) placement of the anus; undescended testes (cryptorchidism) in affected males; kidney (renal) defects: structural malformations of the heart (congenital heart defects); and/or other abnormalities.

