Chromosome 18, Tetrasomy 18p

synonyms:
Tetrasomy, Short Arm of Chromosome 18

overview:
Chromosome 18, Tetrasomy 18p is a very rare chromosomal disorder in which the short arm of the 18th chromosome (18p) appears four times (tetrasomy) rather than twice in cells of the body. Individuals with a normal chromosomal make-up (karyotype) have two 18th chromosomes, both of which have a short arm (“18p”) and a long arm (“18q”). However, in individuals with Chromosome 18, Tetrasomy 18p, four short arms (18ps) are present in cells of the body rather than the normal two.
The symptoms of Chromosome 18, Tetrasomy 18p may vary from case to case. Many affected individuals may have abnormalities of the head and facial (craniofacial) area; malformations of the spine, hands, and/or feet; neuromuscular abnormalities, such as increased muscle tone (hypertonia), increased reflex reactions (hyperreflexia), and difficulty coordinating movement; kidney (renal) malformations; and/or additional physical abnormalities. In addition, children and adults with Chromosome 18, Tetrasomy 18p often exhibit moderate to severe mental retardation, limitations in speech, and/or behavioral abnormalities. In most cases, Chromosome 18, Tetrasomy 18p is the result of a spontaneous (de novo) genetic change (mutation) early in embryonic development that occurs for unknown reasons (sporadic).

symptoms:
Chromosome 18, Tetrasomy 18p is a very rare chromosomal disorder in which the short arm of chromosome 18 (18p) appears four times (tetrasomy) rather than twice in cells of the body.  Symptoms may vary from case to case.
Many infants with Chromosome 18, Tetrasomy 18p have a low birthweight, feeding problems, and a tendency to vomit.  If necessary calories and nutrients are not obtained, affected infants may fail to thrive as a result.
Most infants with Chromosome 18, Tetrasomy 18p have abnormalities of the head and facial (craniofacial) area.  The fibrous joint (sagittal suture) between the bones that form the sides of the skull (parietal bones) may close prematurely (dolichocephaly), causing the head to appear unusually long and narrow; the head may also be abnormally small (microcephaly), and the two sides of the face may appear to be of unequal shape and/or  size (facial asymmetry).  Affected infants may also have an abnormally small mouth; a highly arched roof of the mouth (palate); an unusually small jaw (micrognathia); malformed (dysplastic), low-set ears; and/or a pinched nose.  In rare cases, additional craniofacial abnormalities may include vertical skin folds on either side of the nose (epicanthal folds)  that may cover the eyes’ inner corners; eyes that are unusually close together (ocular hypotelorism); incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate); and/or overgrowth of the gums (gingival hypertrophy).
Individuals with Chromosome 18, Tetrasomy 18p often have several skeletal abnormalities.  These may include a sideways curvative of the spine (scoliosis), sometimes occurring in association with a front-to-back curvative of the spine (kyphosis); an unusually small hipbone; and/or additional hip deformities (e.g., coxa valga).  Many affected individuals exhibit malformations of the bones in the hands and/or feet, including  fingers and/or toes that overlap and/or are unusually long, abnormally bent (clinodactyly), and/or webbed or fused (syndactyly).  In some cases, the arches of the feet may also be flat (pes planus).  Additional abnormalities of the hands may also be present, such as a single deep crease across the palms of the hands (simian crease) and/or absence of  the horizontal ridges that are normally on the skin on the far end of the fingers (distal flexion ridges).  Many affected individuals also tend to have a distinctive body shape, consisting of an abnormally thin build, narrow chest and shoulders, and unusually prominent bones and/or muscles (asthenic habitus).
In most people with Tetrasomy 18p, clusters of nerve fibers in the spinal cord (pyramidal tract) that help to regulate voluntary and reflex muscle activity may not function appropriately.  As a result, affected individuals may exhibit several neuromuscular abnormalities, such as increased muscle tone (hypertonia); increased reflex reactions  (hyperreflexia), including an abnormal reflex that consists of repeated flexing and relaxing of the foot (ankle clonus); and/or muscle stiffness and awkwardness in movement (spasticity).  As affected people grow older, many may have an abnormal walking style (gait).  In addition, in some individuals with Tetrasomy 18p, electrical disturbances may occur in the  brain, causing involuntary tightening and relaxing (clonus) of specific muscles or muscle groups (motor seizures).
Many individuals with Chromosome 18, Tetrasomy 18p may also exhibit kidney (renal) abnormalities.  For example, each kidney normally has a tube (ureter) that brings urine to the bladder.  However, in some cases of Tetrasomy 18p, each kidney may have two such tubes (double ureter).  If the double ureters fail to join together to become one tube before  entering the bladder, one of the tubes may drain the urine in an inappropriate (ectopic) location.  Blockage (obstruction) may result, causing an abnormal accumulation of urine in and swelling (distension) of the ureters (hydroureter) and kidneys (hydronephrosis).  In addition, the other ureter may only be loosely embedded in the bladder, potentially causing backflow (reflux) of urine into the ureter, repeated bladder infections, and/or ureter blockage and hydronephrosis.
Other kidney abnormalities have also occurred in association with Chromosome 18, Tetrasomy 18p.  For example, during normal development, the kidneys eventually “rotate” into their proper position in the back of the abdominal cavity.  However, in some individuals with Tetrasomy 18p, the kidneys may not rotate into the appropriate position.  As a result,  the kidneys may be compressed by other organs that are also in the abdominal cavity, potentially causing abnormal renal function.  In addition, in some cases of Tetrasomy 18p, the two kidneys may be united at the base, forming a horseshoe shape (horseshoe kidney); in such cases, kidney function is usually normal.
Some individuals with Tetrasomy 18p may have additional physical abnormalities.  For example, at birth, some may have temporarily low levels of an antibody that helps fight infections (i.e., immunoglobulin A [IgA]).  In addition, some individuals may exhibit a heart murmur and/or, in rare cases, failure of the testes to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism) in males.
In most cases, children and adults with Chromosome 18, Tetrasomy 18p also exhibit moderate to severe mental retardation, limited speech and vocabulary, and behavioral abnormalities.

