Chromosome 5, Trisomy 5p

synonyms:
chromosome 5, trisomy 5p, complete (5p11-ter), includedchromosome 5, trisomy 5p, partial, includeddup(5p) syndromeduplication 5p syndrometrisomy 5psupernumerary marker chromosome 5pr(5)

overview:
Trisomy 5p is a rare chromosomal disorder in which all or a portion of the short arm (p) of chromosome 5 (5p) appears three times (trisomy) rather than twice in cells of the body. Often the duplicated portion of 5p (trisomy) is due to a complex rearrangement involving other chromosomes. These individuals have a variable phenotype depending on which chromosome is involved, the size of the duplication and whether there is loss of material from the same or another chromosome.
Affected individuals may have an isolated duplication of 5p, a ring or supernumerary marker chromosome made up of only 5p material and the pericentric area of 5q, or when there is a derivative chromosome (unbalanced) from a translocation (switch of material between chromosomes) involving the short arm of chromosome 5 and the short arm of chromosomes 13,14,15,21,or 22) . These individuals have less variability since all of the material involved is from chromosome 5p. The variability is due solely to the size and location of the duplication. The individuals with only the duplication allow a better description of the symptoms (phenotype) and definition of a critical region for certain symptoms (cardiac abnormalities and seizures). Many affected infants and children have abnormalities that include low muscle tone (hypotonia); an unusually large head (macrocephaly) and additional abnormalities of the head and facial (craniofacial) area; large abdominal regions, long, slender fingers (arachnodactyly); delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and physical activities (psychomotor impairment); and intellectual disability. Some affected individuals may have heart defects and seizures. Not all individuals with trisomy 5p will have all of the symptoms of the disorder.

symptoms:
The symptoms and physical findings associated with trisomy 5p are variable and depend on the location and size of the duplicated segment.  The information reported here is from case reports with duplications, markers, rings or translocations involving the short arm of chromosome 5 with the short arm of an acrocentric chromosome (13,14,15,21,or 22).  Other findings may be present if there are monosomies (deletions) due to complex rearrangements or translocations involving other chromosomes and the short arm of chromosome 5p.
Infants with the disorder may have a normal birth weight or intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR). There may be extra fluid around the baby (polyhydramnios) during the pregnancy, early labor, or a decrease in the fluid in the stomach of the baby. The decrease in the fluid is believed to be due to swallowing tube abnormalities (esophageal atresia). Apgars at birth may be lower than the expected 9/10 and have been reported in the range of 5/6 most likely due to respiratory distress (trouble breathing) and low muscle tone (hypotonia).  At birth the soft parts of the skull where the bones of the skull come together (fontanels) may be enlarged. Growth delays after birth (postnatal growth retardation) are common along with abnormally diminished muscle tone (hypotonia). The muscle tone may be mixed with some areas such as the neck and trunk showing low muscle tone (hypotonia) and other areas such as the lower limbs showing increased muscle tone or stiffness (hypertonia).
There are characteristic malformations of the head and facial (craniofacial) area.  The head may be unusually large (macrocephaly) and has been described as long from front to back (dolichocephaly).  There may also be a broad forehead.  CT and MRI have shown that some individuals increased fluid in the ventricles of the brain (hydrocephalus). The eyes may be widely spaced (hypertelorism), have an upslant to them and the opening for the eye (palpebral fissure) may be small.  There may also bevertical skin folds covering the eyes’ inner corners (epicanthal folds).  The eyes may be small (microopthalmia) or they may be an abnormal deviation of one eye in relation to the other (strabismus).  Partial absence of tissue from the colored portion of the eyes (coloboma), or protrusion of the eyes from the orbit (exophthalmos) has been reported.  The eyebrows may be sparse and a depressed nasal bridge may be present, with a broad nasal tip and the nose itself may be short.   Ears are often low-set and there may be fewer creases of the ear (simple helix) or the ear may have indented areas (crumpled helix).  Hearing tends to be normal. There may be a high arched palate.  The chin is set back (retrognathia) but in a few cases, in older individuals, the chin is prominent.  There may be a large tongue (macroglossia). There may be flattening of the cheek area (midface hyperplasia).  Individuals are noted to have a short neck.  In some cases, additional physical abnormalities may also be present, such as narrowing of the larynx (laryngostenosis), which is the organ that connects the throat (pharynx) with the windpipe (trachea).  Some of these physical findings have been noted to be similar to a condition known as Binder syndrome.
Infants with trisomy 5p may also have a narrow chest with a prominent or distended abdomen.  Some affected infants may also have structural heart (cardiac) malformations that are present at birth (congenital heart defects), such as an abnormal opening in the fibrous partition (septum) that separates the upper chambers of the heart (atrial septal defects) and/ or an abnormal opening in the fibrous partition that separates the lower chambers of the heart called a VSD (ventral septal defects).  Some individual have problems with the urine collecting system in the kidneys (pyelectasis).  Hyodceles (swelling of the scrotum) and hernias have been reported.  Several children have been reported with dry skin or eczema.
There are also characteristic abnormalities of the hands and feet. These may include abnormally long, slender fingers (arachnodactyly); short first toes; or deformities in which the feet are abnormally twisted out of position or shape (clubfeet). Shortened femurs have also been described in association with 5p duplication.
Some affected infants may have feeding difficulties and an increased susceptibility to repeated respiratory infections. The increase in respiratory infections is thought to be due to a molecule that helps protect the lining of the mouth and respiratory track from bacteria. The molecule is called IGA (immunoglobulin A) and although it is produced in normal amounts, the amount secreted is decreased.  Reports exist of incoordination of swallowing which leads to aspiration which can lead to pneumonia and feeding difficulties.  Deaths have been reported due to respiratory problems.
Trisomy 5p may also be associated with abnormal delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and physical activities (psychomotor impairment) and varying levels of intellectual disability, including autism spectrum disorders. Abnormal episodes of uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain (seizures) are frequently reported and the seizures may require multiple medications. Speech is often delayed and children may have echolalia (repetitive speech patterns- like the child is echoing things that they have heard at some time in their life.).  There may be repetitive movements of the hands (stereotypic movements).  Attention Deficit Disorder is very common.  Increase weight gain and obesity is reported in older individuals.  There is one individual reported with swelling (lymphedema) of the legs.  It is uncertain whether the lymphedema was due to the obesity or is a separate finding.

