Chromosome 15 Ring

synonyms:
r15Ring 15Ring 15, ChromosomeRing 15, Chromosome (mosaic pattern)

overview:
Chromosome 15 Ring results from loss (deletion) of genetic material from both ends of the 15th chromosome and a joining of the ends to form a ring. Chromosomes are found in the nucleus of all body cells. They carry the genetic characteristics of each individual. Pairs of human chromosomes are numbered from 1 through 22, with an unequal 23rd pair of X and Y chromosomes for males and two X chromosomes for females. Each chromosome has a short arm designated as “p” and a long arm identified by the letter “q”. Chromosomes are further subdivided into bands that are numbered.
In individuals with Chromosome 15 Ring, the variability of associated symptoms and findings may depend upon the amount and location of genetic material lost from the 15th chromosome, the stability of the ring chromosome during subsequent cellular divisions, or other factors. Evidence suggests that the clinical features seen in Chromosome 15 Ring appear to result from deletions of genetic material from the long arm (q) of chromosome 15 (known as “monosomy 15q”), with the ring chromosome typically replacing a normal 15th chromosome. In addition, in some cases, only a certain percentage of an individual’s cells may contain Chromosome 15 Ring, while other cells may have a normal chromosomal makeup (a finding known as “chromosomal mosaicism”), potentially affecting the variability of associated symptoms and findings.
In most cases, Chromosome 15 Ring appears to be caused by spontaneous (de novo) errors very early in embryonic development. In such cases, the parents of the affected child usually have normal chromosomes and a relatively low risk of having another child with the chromosomal abnormality. However, there have been rare cases in which a parent of an affected individual also has Chromosome 15 Ring. In such instances, the chances are greater of having another child with the chromosomal abnormality. In addition, a few cases have been reported in which Chromosome 15 Ring has been the result of a “balanced translocation” in one of the parents. Translocations occur when regions of certain chromosomes break off and are rearranged, resulting in shifting of genetic material and an altered set of chromosomes. If a chromosomal rearrangement is balanced, meaning that it consists of an altered but balanced set of chromosomes, it is usually harmless to the carrier. However, such a chromosomal rearrangement may be associated with an increased risk of abnormal chromosomal development in the carrier’s offspring.
Chromosomal analysis and genetic counseling are typically recommended for parents of an affected child to help confirm or exclude the presence of Chromosome 15 Ring, potential mosaicism, or a balanced translocation in one of the parents.
Many individuals with Chromosome 15 Ring have some features similar to those associated with Russell-Silver syndrome (RSS), which is a genetic disorder characterized by growth deficiency and short stature, distinctive facial abnormalities, and other features. (For further information, please see the “Related Disorders” section below.) In some of these cases, genetic analysis has indicated that the prenatal and postnatal growth retardation associated with Chromosome 15 Ring (and potentially suggestive of RSS) may result from deletion of a gene known as the insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF1R) gene, which has been mapped to the long arm of chromosome 15 (15q25-q26).

symptoms:
Although associated features may be variable, Chromosome 15 Ring is commonly characterized by growth delays before and after birth, resulting in short stature (dwarfism); varying degrees of mental retardation; low muscle tone (hypotonia); craniofacial malformations; and limb abnormalities.
According to reports in the medical literature, Chromosome 15 Ring is often associated with mild to moderate mental retardation.  However, in some instances, severe mental retardation may become evident during adulthood.  In addition, some affected infants and children may have delays in the acquisition of language and speech.
In many individuals with Chromosome 15 Ring, craniofacial malformations may result in a distinctive facial appearance.  Such abnormalities may include an unusually small head (microcephaly) with a prominent forehead (frontal bossing); a “triangular-shaped” face; widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); a high, broad nasal bridge; and/or malformed outer ears.
Many affected individuals may also have abnormalities of the hands and feet.  These may include delayed bone age; abnormal shortness of certain bones of the fingers and toes (phalanges), causing the hands and feet to appear short; abnormal deviation (clinodactyly) of the “pinkies” or fifth fingers; and/or underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the thumbs.
In many affected males, decreased functioning of the testes (hypogonadism) results in infertility.  However, reports suggest that gonadal (i.e., ovarian) function, sexual development, and fertility appear to be normal in most affected females.
In some cases, Chromosome 15 Ring may be associated with additional physical findings.  Such abnormalities may include structural malformations of the heart that are present at birth (congenital heart defects), kidney (renal) defects, and/or congenital dislocation of the hips.  In addition, some affected individuals may have light brown, pale tan, or “coffee-colored” patches on the skin (cafe-au-lait spots).

