Chromosome 7, Partial Monosomy 7p

synonyms:
Chromosome 7, 7p Deletion Syndrome, PartialChromosome 7, Partial Deletion of Short ArmDel(7p) Syndrome, PartialInterstitial 7p Monosomy, IncludedPartial 7p MonosomyTerminal 7p Monosomy, IncludedTerminal 7p Monosomy, Included

overview:
Chromosome 7, Partial Monosomy 7p is a rare chromosomal disorder characterized by deletion (monosomy) of a portion of the short arm (p) of chromosome 7 (7p). Associated symptoms and findings may be variable and may depend on the specific size and location of the deleted segment of 7p. However, in many cases, there is early closure of the fibrous joints (cranial sutures) between certain bones of the skull (craniosynostosis), resulting in an abnormally shaped head. For example, depending on the specific sutures involved, the forehead may appear unusually “triangular shaped” (trigonocephaly) or the head may seem abnormally long and narrow with the top pointed or conical (turricephaly). Affected infants and children may also have additional malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region. Such abnormalities may include an unusually small head (microcephaly), closely or widely set eyes (ocular hypotelorism or hypertelorism), downslanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures), and/or other findings.
Partial Monosomy 7p may also be characterized by additional physical features, such as growth deficiency, musculoskeletal abnormalities, genital defects, structural malformations of the heart that are present at birth (congenital heart defects), and/or other abnormalities. In addition, some affected individuals may have varying degrees of mental retardation and delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and motor activities (psychomotor delays). Normal intelligence has also been reported.
In most cases, Chromosome 7, Partial Monosomy 7p appears to result from spontaneous (de novo) errors very early in embryonic development that occur for unknown reasons.

symptoms:
As noted above, the symptoms and physical findings associated with Chromosome 7, Partial Monosomy 7p may vary in range and severity from case to case.  However, many affected individuals have growth delays before and after birth (prenatal and postnatal growth retardation).  The syndrome may also be associated with varying degrees of psychomotor retardation and mental retardation; however, as noted earlier, some affected individuals may have normal intelligence.
Partial Monosomy 7p is also commonly characterized by premature closure of one or more fibrous joints (cranial sutures) between particular bones in the skull (craniosynostosis), potentially resulting in deformity of the skull and an unusually shaped head.  The degree and severity of craniosynostosis may be variable, depending on the specific cranial sutures involved.  For example, according to reports in the medical literature, Partial Monosomy 7p may be associated with various types of craniosynostosis, such as trigonocephaly or turricephaly.  In trigonocephaly, early closure of the suture between bones forming the forehead (i.e., metopic suture) may cause the forehead to appear unusually narrow, pointed, and “triangular” or “keel shaped, with an abnormally decreased distance between the eyes (ocular hypotelorism).  Turricephaly (also known as oxycephaly or acrocephaly) is characterized by premature fusion of the suture (i.e., coronal suture) between bones forming the forehead and the upper sides of the skull (frontal and parietal bones) and possibly other sutures, causing the head to appear unusually long and narrow, with the top conical or pointed.  In addition, the back portion of the head (occiput) may appear flattened and the forehead unusually prominent.  In some cases, other craniofacial features associated with variable craniosynostosis may include an unusually small head (microcephaly), widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism), and/or other findings; the skull may also appear relatively dissimilar from one side to the other (cranial asymmetry).
In addition, in some instances, craniosynostosis, particularly that involving two or more cranial sutures, may lead to certain neurologic complications.  Such complications may include hydrocephalus and abnormally increased pressure within the skull (intracranial pressure).  Hydrocephalus is a condition in which obstructed flow or impaired absorption of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) results in an abnormal accumulation of CSF, usually under increased pressure.  CSF is the watery protective fluid that circulates through the cavities (ventricles) of the brain, the canal containing the spinal cord (spinal canal), and the space between layers of the protective membranes (meninges) surrounding the brain and spinal cord (i.e., subarachnoid space).  Depending on the age at onset and other factors, associated symptoms may include sudden episodes of uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain (seizures), irritability, vomiting, headache, loss of coordination, deteriorating mental functioning, and/or other findings.  In severe cases, potentially life-threatening complications may result.
In some affected individuals, Partial Monosomy 7p may be associated with additional craniofacial abnormalities.  Such features may include downwardly slanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures); vertical skin folds that may cover the eyes’ inner corners (epicanthal folds); drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis); small, low-set, malformed (dysplastic) ears; a sunken nasal bridge (“saddle nose”); and/or other abnormalities.
In some instances, Partial Monosomy 7p may also be characterized by musculoskeletal abnormalities.  Reported features have included permanent flexion of one or more fingers (camptodactyly); unusually short hands; abnormalities of the thumbs; a deformity in which the top part of the foot is elevated and the heel turned outward (“clubfoot” [i.e., talipes calcaneovalgus]); limited range of movement of certain joints; and/or other findings.
According to some reports, up to 50 percent of affected individuals may also have various congenital heart (cardiac) defects.  Such cardiac defects may include an abnormal opening in the partition (septum) that separates the two lower chambers (ventricles) of the heart (ventricular septal defect [VSD]), an opening in the septum separating the two upper heart chambers (atrial septal defect), and/or other heart anomalies, allowing some oxygen-rich blood to recirculate through the lungs and potentially leading to rising blood pressure in the lungs (pulmonary hypertension).  Associated symptoms and findings may vary, depending on the size, nature, and/or combination of heart malformations present and other factors.  For example, in some cases, such as those with small isolated VSDs, no symptoms may be apparent (asymptomatic).  However, in other instances, such as those with larger VSDs, associated symptoms and findings may include difficulties feeding, poor growth, difficult or labored breathing (dyspnea), profuse sweating, increased susceptibility to respiratory infections, impaired ability of the heart to pump blood efficiently to the lungs and the rest of the body (heart failure), enlargement of the heart, and/or other abnormalities.  In severe cases, congenital heart disease may lead to potentially life-threatening complications.
Partial Monosomy 7p may also be characterized by additional physical features.  Some affected individuals may have abnormal skin ridge patterns of the palms of the hands.  Additional reported findings have included a highly arched roof of the mouth (palate) or incomplete closure (clefting) of the palate (cleft palate); retraction or downward displacement of the tongue (glossoptosis); underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the external genitals; kidney (renal) defects, such as renal hypoplasia; an abnormally small colon (microcolon); and/or other defects.

