Chromosome 11, Partial Monosomy 11q

synonyms:
11q- syndrome, partial11q terminal deletion disorderdeletion 11q syndrome, partialdistal 11q monosomydistal 11q- syndromeJacobsen syndromeJSmonosomy 11q, partialpartial monosomy of long arm of chromosome 11

overview:
Partial monosomy 11q syndrome is a rare chromosomal disorder in which a portion of the long arm of chromosome 11 is deleted (missing). Jacobsen syndrome is observed in SOME  patients with 11q partial deletion. The region consistently missing in individuals with this disorder (JS) is band q24.1 (11q24.1) suggesting that the absence of this specific area is critical to developing the disorder (this chromosome region is called the Jacobsen syndrome critical region). It is important to stress that a complete genetic assessment requires both traditional chromosome tests (with or without the FISH staining technique), and CGH array.
An 11q deletion involving regions ouside the JS crititcal region causes a different genetic condition.
The range and severity of symptoms varies, greatly depending on the exact location and size of the missing genetic material. Symptoms commonly associated with partial monosomy 11q include abnormally slow growth before and after birth (prenatal and postnatal growth delay), moderate to severe delay in skills requiring coordination of mental and muscular activity and intellectual disability Most affected persons have mild to severe intellectual disability but rarely, individuals may have normal-borderline intelligence. Characteristic physical abnormalities may include short stature, unusual shape of the head and face (craniofacial dysmorphism), hands, feet, and congenital abnormality of the heart, ears, kidneys and genitalia. Bleeding due to platelet abnormalities and immunological defects are very common. The exact cause at the origin of partial loss of 11q is not fully understood.

symptoms:
Symptoms and physical characteristics associated with partial monosomy 11q vary greatly depending on the exact size and gene content of the deleted material on chromosome 11. For a complete genetic assessment it is important that both traditional chromosome tests and CGH array are performed. No specific feature has been seen in every person, so it is important to note that affected children will not have all of the symptoms discussed below.
Physical development: Many individuals with partial monosomy 11q would reach an adult height that is well below average (short stature). Some children with partial monosomy 11q may have low levels of a growth hormone known as insulin growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and may have very short stature.
Intellectual development: Affected infants and children may experience delays in reaching developmental milestones (psychomotor developmental delay) and behavioral problems. Rarely, intelligence may be borderline-normal, but in most children have mild to moderate intellectual disability. Affected infants may also have severe speech impairment. The degree of speech impairment and intellectual disability are usually associated with larger deletions. Individuals with smaller deleted segments are more likely to have borderline intelligence and less severe symptoms overall. About a half of affected individuals haves autism or autistic behaviour.
A specific finding frequently associated with partial monosomy 11q (85% of cases) is thrombocytopenia, a condition characterized by a reduced number of platelets. Normal platelets are tiny, specialized blood cells that, in case of vascular damage, help prevent bleeding by forming clots. When a blood vessel is injured, platelets travel to the site of injury and clump together to form a clot that stops bleeding. Infants with partial monosomy 11q very frequently have a low number of platelets which causes them to bruise easily and bleed excessively. They may be at risk of internal bleeding. As affected individuals age, platelet numbers usually increase, but many individuals still bruise easily and experience prolonged bleeding episodes suggesting that the platelets are not functioning properly.
The bleeding abnormalities associated with partial monosomy 11q are extremely similar to a bleeding disorder called Paris-Trousseau syndrome (PTS). Some researchers believe these disorders are actually one disorder; some believe PTS is a variant of partial monosomy 11q; and others believe that they are similar, yet distinct, disorders. Virtually all children with Jacobsen syndrome have thrombocytopenia/thrombocytopathia, and it is extremely important to assume that platelet functions may be impaired even when their number is normal. Blood or platelet transfusion must be considered before and during surgery.
Another common disorder in patients with 11q deletion is immunodeficiency with a deficit of cellular and/or humoral immunity. As a consequence, children with JS have frequent infections of ears, respiratory tract, skin, etc and may not produce enough antibodies after vaccinations.
Many infants with partial monosomy 11q exhibit distinctive facial features including skull deformities (macrocrania or abnormal skull shape caused by craniosynostosis), high prominent forehead, facial asymmetry, widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), crossed eyes (strabismus), drooping eyelids (palpebral ptosis) and the presence of tiny folds of skin on either side of the nose that may partially cover the eyes’ inner corners near the nose (epicanthal folds). The nasal bridge is broad and the nose is short; nostrils that are flared forward (anteverted nares); thin upper lips; down-turned mouth; small lower jaw (micrognathia); low-set and small malformed (dysplastic) ears. Children have small baby teeth but permanent teeth are usually large and some individuals may develop dental abnormalities.
Infants with partial monosomy 11q may also have abnormalities of the hands and feet: minor webbing of the fingers (skin syndactyly); thin fingers; abnormal curving of the pinky so that is bent toward the ring finger (clinodactyly); the presence of a single crease across the palms of the hands (simian crease); big and long allux with short toes; an abnormally twisted position of feet (talipes equinovarus or clubfoot). In addition, in many children, certain joints may become fixed or stuck in a bent position (contractures). A contracture occurs when thickening and shortening of tissue such as muscle fibers causes deformity and restricts movements of affected areas, especially the joints. Scoliosis (abnormal curve of the spine) may develop during adolescence.
More than half of individuals with partial monosomy 11q show heart abnormalities that are present at birth (congenital heart defects). The most common congenital heart defects associated with partial monosomy 11q are ventricular septal defects (VSDs) and left-sided obstructive lesions. The normal heart has four chambers. The two upper chambers, known as atria, are separated from each other by a fibrous partition known as the atrial septum. The two lower chambers are known as ventricles and are separated from each other by the ventricular septum. Valves connect the atria (left and right) to their respective ventricles. The aorta, is the main vessel of arterial circulation, and carries blood from the left ventricle and away from the heart.
Ventricular septal defects (VSDs) can occur in any portion of the ventricular septum. The size and location of the defect determine the severity of the symptoms. Small ventricular septal defects may close without treatment (spontaneously) or become less significant as the child matures and grows. Moderately-sized defects may affect the ability of the heart to pump blood efficiently to the lungs and the rest of the body (congestive cardiac failure). Symptoms associated with cardiac failure may include an abnormally rapid rate of breathing (tachypnea), wheezing, unusually fast heartbeat (tachycardia) and/or failure to grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Large ventricular septal defects can cause life-threatening complications during infancy. Persistent elevation of the pressure within the artery that carries blood away from the heart and to the lungs (pulmonary artery) can cause permanent damage to the lungs.
Left-sided obstructive lesions are defects that prevent the adequate blood flow from the heart. Such defects that have been associated with partial monosomy 11q include narrowing of aorta (aortic coarctation); narrowing of the valve that connects the left ventricle to the aorta (aortic valve stenosis); narrowing of the valve of that connects the lower and upper left chamber of the heart (mitral valve stenosis) and hypoplastic left heart syndrome, a group of closely-related defects characterized by underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the left side of the heart and associated structures.
Additional heart defects that have been reported in some individuals with partial monosomy 11q include double outlet right ventricle, in which both the pulmonary artery and aorta connect to the right ventricle (the aorta normally connects to the left ventricle); transposition of the great arteries, in which the two large (great) arteries arise from the wrong area of the heart. The aorta arises from the right ventricle and the pulmonary arises from the left ventricle; aberrant right subclavian artery, in which one of the main arteries supplying blood to the upper arms and legs arises from the wrong area of the heart; and atrioventricular septal canal defects, in which the partitions (septa) and valves separating the right and left chambers of the heart are improperly developed.
Cardiac abnormalities are usually present at birth, they can be very severe and require very early surgery in the neonatal period. However vascular stenosis (including aortic stenosis) may develop in some patients later in life.
Individuals with partial monosomy 11q frequently have middle ear infections (otitis media) and inflammation of the sinuses (sinusitis). Some individuals with partial monosomy 11q experience some degree of hearing impairment.
Additional findings have been associated with partial monosomy 11q. These finding affect less than half of affected individuals. In some cases, the fibrous joints (metopic sutures) between the two sides of the bone in the forehead (frontal bone) may close prematurely (craniosynostosis). As a result, the head may have an unusual appearance with an abnormally prominent forehead “triangular-shaped head when looked from above”  (trigonocephaly). If craniosynostosis compromises the growth of the skull, there is indication for a early skull surgery (craniotomy), that would allow the head to develop.
Additional findings affecting the eyes may occur including absence of some tissue from the colored portion of the eye (iris coloboma), giving the eye a “keyhole” appearance and improper developed of the nerve-rich membrane lining the eyes (retina). The retina converts visual images into nerves, which are then relayed to the brain. In some individuals with partial monosomy 11q a condition called tortuosity of the retinal vessels may occur. In this condition, the tiny vessels that supply blood to the retina may be twisted and malformed.
Eczema, a skin condition in which individuals develop an inflamed, scaly, red rash that is often itchy, may also occur. Due to the immune defect, the skin can develop bacterial, viral (wart) and or fungal infections. After an injury, the scar may develop abnormally below the normal layer of skin tissue (atrophic scars) or, conversely, there may be enlarged, raised scars called keloids.
Some individuals may develop gastrointestinal problems at birth including feeding difficulties, abnormal narrowing (stenosis) of the band of muscle fibers (pyloric sphincter) at the junction between the stomach and small intestine (pyloric stenosis), resulting in obstruction of the normal flow of stomach contents into the small intestine. Pyloric stenosis can cause affected individuals to vomit forcefully and may result in dehydration, a problem that is observed in the neonatal period. Surgical treatment of pyloric stenosis may be necessary. Children with Jacobsen syndrome often suffer from chronic constipation that would benefit from oral administration of edible oil.
Some affected infants may also have abnormalities of the genital and urinary (genitourinary) systems. For example, females may have an abnormal passage between the bladder and the vagina (vescicovaginal fistula) (rare). In affected males, the urinary opening (meatus) may appear on the underside of the penis (hypospadias); the testes may fail to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism); and/or portions of the large intestine may protrude through an abnormal opening in muscles of the groin (inguinal hernia).
Some infants with partial monosomy 11q may also have kidney (renal) abnormalities such as a horseshoe kidney (abnormally shaped kidneys) and duplicate kidney and/or a duplicate ureter, the small, thin tube that connects the kidneys to the bladder. The ureters drain urine through the muscular contractions. Most individuals in general population have two ureters (one connected to each kidney). A duplicate ureter is an extra ureter that may or may not be associated with any symptoms depending upon their exact location, whether they are malformed and whether they hinder the flow of urine. Kidney malformations are not always associated with obvious symptoms, but clinical problems may arise later in life, therefore an ultrasound scan of the abdomen is required to detect any kidney malformation and allow early monitoring of clinical conditions.

