Chromosome 4, Partial Trisomy Distal 4q

synonyms:
Chromosome 4, Partial Trisomy 4q (4q21-qter to 4q32-qter, included)Chromosome 4, Partial Trisomy 4q (4q2 and 4q3, included)Distal 4q TrisomyDup(4q) Syndrome, PartialDuplication 4q Syndrome, PartialPartial Trisomy 4q Sayndrome

overview:
Chromosome 4, Partial Trisomy Distal 4q is a rare chromosomal disorder in which a portion of the fourth chromosome appears three times (trisomy) rather than twice in cells of the body. Associated symptoms and findings may vary from case to case. However, common features include growth deficiency; mental retardation; distinctive malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region, including an unusually small head (microcephaly), malformed ears, and a prominent nasal bridge; and/or defects of the hands and feet. In some cases, additional physical abnormalities may also be present, such as structural defects of the heart that are present at birth (congenital heart defects); genital abnormalities in affected males; urinary tract defects; and/or other findings. In most cases, the trisomy appears to result from a balanced chromosomal rearrangement in one of the parents; rarely, it is thought to arise from spontaneous (de novo) errors very early in embryonic development that occur for unknown reasons (sporadically).

symptoms:
Chromosome 4, Partial Trisomy Distal 4q is commonly characterized by a low birth weight and growth deficiency.  In addition, many affected infants have low muscle tone (hypotonia), with unusual “floppiness” of voluntary (skeletal) muscles, or excessive muscle tone (hypertonia), with increased resistance to passive stretching.  Additional characteristic features include mental retardation and delays in the acquisition of skills that require the coordination of mental and motor activities (psychomotor retardation).
Partial Trisomy Distal 4q is also associated with various malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region.  Such features commonly include an abnormally small head (microcephaly); a narrow, sloping forehead; relatively large, low-set, malformed (dysplastic) ears; and/or a short neck.  Affected individuals may also have a prominent nasal bridge; an abnormally short vertical groove in the center of the upper lip (i.e., short philtrum); downturned corners of the mouth; pursed lips; a pointed chin; and/or a small, receding jaw (microretrognathia).  Various eye (ocular) abnormalities may also be present, such as widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); narrow, downslanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures); vertical skin folds that may cover the eyes’ inner corners (epicanthal folds); and/or abnormal deviation of one eye in relation to the other (strabismus).  Additional ocular abnormalities have also been reported, including drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis) and/or unusually small eyes (microphthalmia).
Limb defects are also commonly associated with the syndrome.  Such abnormalities may include malformed hands and feet; abnormal development of the thumbs; webbing or fusion (syndactyly) of certain toes; and/or a deformity in which the heel is turned outward from the midline of the leg (talipes valgus).
In some cases, additional physical features may be present.  Male infants typically have a developmental defect in which the testes have failed to descend into the pouchlike structure known as the scrotum (cryptorchidism).  In addition, about 30 percent of affected infants may have an inguinal or umbilical hernia.  In those with an inguinal hernia, there is protrusion (i.e., herniation) of a portion of the intestine into the canal that passes through lower muscular layers of the abdominal wall.  (In males, the inguinal canal is the tubular passageway through which the testes normally descend from the abdomen into the scrotum before birth.)  An umbilical hernia is a skin-covered protrusion of intestine and the fold of fatty membrane in front of the intestine (omentum) through a defect in the abdominal wall at the navel (i.e., the umbilicus, where the umbilical cord joined the fetal abdomen).
Approximately half of affected infants also have various abnormalities of the kidneys and urinary tract, such as underdevelopment of the kidneys (renal hypoplasia); abnormal union of the two kidneys at the base, forming a “horseshoe” shape (horseshoe kidney); swelling (distension) of the kidneys with urine (hydronephrosis) due to narrowing or blockage of the tubes (i.e., ureters) that carry urine from the kidneys into the bladder; and/or other abnormalities.  In addition, about half of those with the syndrome also have heart (cardiac) defects and blood vessel (vascular) abnormalities.  According to reports in the medical literature, severe cardiac and/or renal defects may lead to potentially life-threatening complications in some cases.

