Chromosome 18 Ring

synonyms:
r 18Ring 18Ring Chromosome 18

overview:
Chromosome 18 Ring is a rare disorder in which there is loss (deletion) of genetic material from one or both ends of the 18th chromosome and joining of the chromosomal ends to form a ring.  Associated symptoms and findings may vary greatly in range and severity from case to case, depending upon the amount and location of lost genetic material and other factors. A ring may also be formed without the loss of any genetic material. However, many individuals with the disorder are affected by mental retardation; low muscle tone (hypotonia); growth retardation; repeated infections during the first years of life; and/or malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region. Such craniofacial features often include an unusually small head (microcephaly), widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism), and/or vertical skin folds that cover the eyes’ inner corners (epicanthal folds). Chromosome 18 Ring is usually caused by spontaneous (de novo) errors very early in the development of the embryo that appear to occur randomly for unknown reasons (sporadically).

symptoms:
As mentioned above, associated symptoms and physical features may be extremely variable.   For example, there have been a few cases in which individuals with Chromosome 18 Ring have few or no apparent symptoms.  However, others with the chromosomal abnormality may have multiple, severe features of the disorder.  In most affected individuals, characteristic features include moderate to severe mental retardation; growth delays; poor muscle tone (hypotonia); craniofacial malformations; eye abnormalities; and/or an increased susceptibility to certain infections.
In individuals with Chromosome 18 Ring, craniofacial abnormalities often include an unusually small head (microcephaly); a highly arched roof of the mouth (palate); and a short upper lip with an outwardly turned (everted) lower lip, producing a distinctive, “carp-shaped” mouth.  Additional craniofacial features may include an unusually small or protruding lower jaw (micrognathia or prognathism) and/or an undersized tongue (microglossia).  Affected individuals may also have low-set, malformed (dysplastic) ears and/or narrow (stenotic) or absent (atretic) ear canals, with associated hearing impairment.
Reports indicate that over half of affected individuals also have eye (ocular) abnormalities.  Such ocular defects may include widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); vertical skin folds over the inner angles of the eyes (epicanthal folds); drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis); and/or abnormal deviation of one eye in relation to the other (strabismus).  Some affected individuals may also have involuntary, rhythmic, rapid eye movements (nystagmus); abnormally small eyes (microphthalmia); and/or partial absence of the iris or the colored region of the eyes (aniridia).
Investigators indicate that up to 50 percent of individuals with Chromosome 18 Ring have low levels of a particular antibody (i.e., immunoglobulin A [IgA]), resulting in an increased susceptibility to certain infections during the first years of life.  Rare cases have also been reported in which affected individuals have low levels of other immunoglobulins (e.g., IgG, IgM).
Chromosome 18 Ring may also be characterized by skeletal abnormalities, such as rib and/or spinal column (vertebral) defects; unusually small or short arms and legs (micromelia); abnormal deviation (clinodactyly) of the “pinkies” or fifth fingers; and/or overlying toes.  Additional physical features reported in association with the disorder have included widely spaced, underdeveloped nipples; a low hair line; webbing of the neck; genital abnormalities; structural malformations of the heart (congenital heart defects); and/or kidney (renal) defects.  In addition, some researchers indicate that Chromosome 18 Ring may be associated with an increased predisposition to autoimmune thyroiditis.  Also known as Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, this condition is characterized by inflammation of the thyroid gland (thyroiditis) due to an abnormal immune reaction in which the body produces antibodies improperly directed against the thyroid.  (For further information, please choose “Hashimoto*” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
A few severe cases have also been reported in which Chromosome 18 Ring has been associated with holoprosencephaly.  This is an extremely rare condition in which the forebrain (prosencephalon) fails to divide properly into hemispheres during embryonic development, resulting in malformations of the center (midline) of the brain and the craniofacial region.  Associated findings may be extremely variable.  Some affected individuals may have an abnormally small head (microcephaly), closely set eyes (hypotelorism), absence of certain front teeth (incisors), incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate), an abnormal groove in the upper lip (cleft lip), and/or other abnormalities.  Severely affected individuals may have additional abnormalities, such as malformation or absence of the nose and/or fusion of the orbits into a single eye cavity containing one eye (cyclopia).  (For further information on this condition, please choose “holoprosencephaly” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)

