Chromosome 9 Ring

synonyms:
R9Ring 9Ring 9, Chromosome

overview:
Chromosome 9 Ring is a rare disorder in which there is loss (deletion) of chromosomal material from both ends of the 9th chromosome and joining of the ends to form a ring. Associated symptoms and findings may vary, depending upon the amount and location of lost chromosomal material and other factors. Some affected individuals may have variable malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region. However, in others with the chromosomal abnormality, such features may not be apparent. Chromosome 9 Ring may also be characterized by additional physical features in some cases, including growth retardation, heart defects, genital abnormalities, and/or other findings. In addition, many affected individuals have moderate to severe intellectual disability; however, in some instances, intelligence may be in the low normal range. Chromosome 9 Ring usually appears to result from spontaneous (de novo) errors very early in the development of the embryo that occur for unknown reasons (sporadically).

symptoms:
As noted above, Chromosome 9 Ring may be characterized by various craniofacial malformations; however, in some cases, such features may not be apparent.  Craniofacial defects associated with Chromosome 9 Ring may include an abnormally small head (microcephaly) and/or premature fusion of the fibrous joint (suture) between bones forming the forehead (metopic suture), resulting in an unusually narrow, pointed, “triangular” or “keel-shaped” forehead (trigonocephaly) and closely spaced eyes (ocular hypotelorism).  Some affected individuals may also have abnormally slanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures), slight protrusion of the eyes (exophthalmos), an exaggerated arch to the eyebrows, a small jaw (micrognathia) and small chin, and/or a short neck.
In some cases, Chromosome 9 Ring may also be associated with growth retardation after birth; various structural malformations of the heart (congenital heart defects), such as an abnormal opening in the partition (septum) that normally separates the lower chambers (ventricles) of the heart (ventricular septal defect); and/or variable skeletal abnormalities.  Some affected males may also have genital abnormalities, including ambiguous genitalia or abnormal placement of the urinary opening (hypospadias), such as on the underside of the penis. Additional physical abnormalities have also been reported in association with Chromosome 9 Ring.  These have included incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate); abnormal bending (clinodactyly) of certain fingers; a single crease across the palms of the hands; and/or a condition known as gastroesophageal reflux.  The latter is characterized by abnormal backflow (reflux) of stomach acid into the esophagus, causing inflammation of and possible damage to the esophageal lining.
Chromosome 9 Ring is commonly characterized by moderate to severe intellectual disability.  However, some affected individuals may have intelligence in the low normal range.  Those with the disorder may also show variable delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and physical activities (psychomotor retardation) and/or behavioral abnormalities, such as agitated or withdrawn, introverted behavior.

