Chromosome 18, Monosomy 18p

synonyms:
18p Deletion Syndrome18p- SyndromeDel(18p) SyndromeMonosomy 18p SyndromeShort Arm 18 Deletion Syndrome

overview:
Chromosome 18, Monosomy 18p is a rare chromosomal disorder in which all or part of the short arm (p) of chromosome 18 is deleted (monosomic). The disorder is typically characterized by short stature, variable degrees of mental retardation, speech delays, malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region, and/or additional physical abnormalities. Associated craniofacial defects may vary greatly in range and severity from case to case. However, such features commonly include an unusually small head (microcephaly); a broad, flat nose; a “carp-shaped” mouth; large, protruding ears; widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); and/or other abnormalities. Rarely (i.e., in about 10 percent of cases), Monosomy 18p may be associated with holoprosencephaly, a condition in which the forebrain (prosencephalon) fails to divide properly during embryonic development. Holoprosencephaly may result in varying degrees of mental retardation, other neurologic findings, and/or extremely variable midline facial defects, such as the presence of a single, central front tooth (maxillary incisor); closely spaced eyes (hypotelorism); an abnormal groove in the upper lip (cleft lip); incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate); and/or, in severe cases, absence of the nose and/or cyclopia. Cyclopia is characterized by fusion of the eye cavities (orbits) into a single cavity containing one eye.
In some individuals with Monosomy 18p, additional physical abnormalities may be present. Such findings commonly include a short, webbed neck; a broad chest with widely spaced nipples; relatively small hands and feet; and/or an unusually small penis (micropenis) and/or undescended testes (cryptorchidism) in affected males.
Monosomy 18p is usually caused by spontaneous (de novo) errors very early in the development of the embryo that appear to occur randomly for unknown reasons (sporadically).

symptoms:
The symptoms and physical findings associated with Chromosome 18, Monosomy 18p may be variable from case to case.  However, the syndrome is typically characterized by short stature, mental retardation, various malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region, and/or additional physical abnormalities.
In many cases, infants with Monosomy 18p have a low birth weight, mild to moderate growth deficiency, and poor muscle tone (hypotonia).  In addition, reports indicate that mental retardation is almost always present.  The degree of mental deficiency may be extremely variable, ranging from borderline to severe; however, most are affected by moderate mental retardation.  Many children also have severe delays in the acquisition of speech and language skills, with many not speaking simple words or sentences before approximately age seven to nine years.  Some affected children may also have behavioral or emotional abnormalities, such as difficulties concentrating, restlessness, and rapidly changing moods (emotional lability).
As noted above, associated craniofacial abnormalities may be variable in range and degree.  However, such malformations often include an abnormally small head (microcephaly); a distinctively round face (that may change with age to appear relatively long); a wide, “carp-shaped” mouth with downturning corners; a flattened or broad nose; and large, poorly formed, low-set ears.  Many affected infants also have certain eye (ocular) abnormalities, such as widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); drooping upper eyelids (ptosis); vertical skin folds that may cover the eyes’ inner corners (epicanthal folds); and/or abnormal deviation of one eye in relation to the other (strabismus).  Additional abnormalities may include an unusually small, retracted lower jaw (microretrognathia) and a potentially increased risk of tooth decay (dental caries).
In approximately 10 percent of individuals with Monosomy 18p, holoprosencephaly may be present.  In those with this rare condition, the forebrain failed to normally divide into hemispheres during embryonic development.  Holoprosencephaly may result in variable degrees of mental retardation, sudden episodes of uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain (seizures), and/or additional, variable neurologic findings; in extremely severe cases, potentially life-threatening complications may result during infancy or childhood.  As noted earlier, holoprosencephaly may also result in various abnormalities of midfacial development.  Reports suggest that some with the condition may have a normal or near normal facial appearance, while others may have relatively mild to extremely severe midline facial defects.  In some affected individuals, associated malformations may include the presence of a single, central front tooth of the upper jaw (maxillary incisor); widely or closely set eyes (ocular hypertelorism or hypotelorism); an abnormal groove in the side or middle of the upper lip (lateral or median cleft lip); incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate); and/or, in extremely severe cases, fusion of the eye cavities (orbits) into a single cavity containing one eye (cyclopia).  In addition, depending on the severity of defective midfacial development, nasal abnormalities may be present, such as an unusually flattened nose; a blind-ending, single-nostril nose; or absence of the nose (arhinia) and/or the presence of a tubular appendage above the orbit (proboscis).  (For more information on this condition, choose “holoprosencephaly” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
In some instances, Monosomy 18p may be characterized by other physical findings.  Some affected infants may have an abnormal accumulation of fluid in soft tissues of the hands and feet, with associated swelling (lymphedema); a short, webbed neck; and/or an unusually broad chest with widely spaced nipples.  Limb malformations may also be present, such as relatively small hands and feet; short fingers; abnormal deviation of the “pinkies” or fifth fingers (clinodactyly); and/or webbing or fusion (syndactyly) of certain toes.  In affected males, physical features may include an unusually small penis (micropenis) and/or undescended testes (cryptorchidism).  Additional features have also been reported in association with Monosomy 18p in some cases, such as deficiency of a particular antibody (i.e., immunoglobulin A [IgA]) that helps the body to fight certain infections; abnormal absence of scalp hair (alopecia) beginning during infancy; and/or other findings.  In addition, according to researchers, various structural malformations of the heart (congenital heart defects) may be present in up to five percent of cases.

