Chromosome 6, Partial Trisomy 6q

synonyms:
6q+ Syndrome, PartialChromosome 6, Trisomy 6q2Distal Duplication 6qDistal Trisomy 6qDuplication 6q, PartialTrisomy 6q, PartialTrisomy 6q Syndrome, Partial

overview:
Chromosome 6, Partial Trisomy 6q is an extremely rare chromosomal disorder in which a portion of the 6th chromosome (6q) is present three times (trisomy) rather than twice in cells of the body. Associated symptoms and findings may vary in range and severity from case to case. However, many affected infants and children have slow physical development (growth retardation); mental retardation; malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region; an unusually short, webbed neck; abnormal bending (flexion) or extension of certain joints in fixed postures (joint contractures); and/or other physical abnormalities. In most cases, Chromosome 6, Partial Trisomy 6q has been the result of a balanced translocation in one of the parents.

symptoms:
As noted above, the symptoms and physical findings associated with Chromosome 6, Trisomy 6q may be variable.  However, in many cases, the disorder is characterized by growth delays before and after birth, severe to profound mental retardation, a delay in the acquisition of skills requiring coordination of muscular and mental activity (psychomotor retardation), distinctive malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region, musculoskeletal abnormalities, and/or additional physical features.
Characteristic craniofacial abnormalities may include a small head (microcephaly); an abnormally flat face and back region of the head (occiput); “almond-shaped,” protruding, widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); and/or downwardly slanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures).  Affected individuals may also have a small, “bow-shaped” mouth with thin lips, a small jaw (micrognathia), incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate), a large, flat nose; malformed ears, and/or thin, arched eyebrows.  In some cases, the fibrous joints (i.e., coronal and sagittal sutures) between certain bones in the front and the sides of the skull (frontal and parietal bones) may close prematurely (craniosynostosis), causing the head to grow upward (turricephaly). As a result, the head may appear unusually long, narrow, and pointed at the top, and the forehead may be abnormally prominent.
Many individuals with Chromosome 6, Partial Trisomy 6q also have distinctive abnormalities of the neck. The neck may be unusually short and wide, with abnormal webbing across the front (anterior) and/or side (lateral), potentially restricting movement of the jaw and neck. In addition, the hairline may be abnormally low on the back of the neck (nape).
Chromosome 6, Partial Trisomy 6q is also often associated with abnormal bending (flexion), extension, and fixation of certain joints (contractures), such as the fingers, wrists, and/or other regions (e.g., elbows, knees, hips), causing limitation of movement and abnormal postures.  Affected individuals may also have webbing or fusion of certain fingers and/or toes (syndactyly), deformities in which the hands and/or feet are twisted out of shape or position (clubhands and/or clubfeet), abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis), reduced diameter of the chest; and/or widely spaced nipples.
Genital abnormalities may also be present.  In affected females, there may be underdevelopment of the skin folds surrounding the vaginal opening (hypoplastic labia).  In affected males, genital abnormalities may include an abnormally small penis (micropenis), underdevelopment of the scrotum; abnormal placement of the urinary opening (hypospadias), such as on the underside of the penis; and/or undescended testes (cryptorchidism).
In rare cases, individuals with Chromosome 6, Partial Trisomy 6q may also have various internal organ malformations. These may include heart (cardiac), intestinal, kidney (renal), and/or brain (cerebral) abnormalities.

