Chromosome 14, Trisomy Mosaic

synonyms:
Trisomy 14 MosaicTrisomy 14 Mosaicism Syndrome

overview:
Chromosome 14, Trisomy Mosaic is a rare chromosomal disorder in which chromosome 14 appears three times (trisomy) rather than twice in some cells of the body. The term “mosaic” indicates that some cells contain the extra chromosome 14, whereas others have the normal chromosomal pair.
The disorder may be characterized by growth delays before birth (intrauterine growth retardation); failure to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive) during infancy; delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and physical abilities (psychomotor delays); and mental retardation. Affected infants also have distinctive abnormalities of the head and facial (craniofacial) region, such as a prominent forehead; deeply set, widely spaced eyes; a broad nasal bridge; and low-set, malformed ears. Additional craniofacial abnormalities may include an unusually small lower jaw (micrognathia); a large mouth and thick lips; and incomplete closure or abnormally high arching of the roof of the mouth (palate). Many affected infants also have structural malformations of the heart (e.g., tetralogy of Fallot). In some cases, additional physical abnormalities may also be present.

symptoms:
The symptoms and physical findings associated with Chromosome 14, Trisomy Mosaic may depend on the percentage of cells containing the extra 14th chromosome. However, the syndrome is typically characterized by growth and developmental delays, mental retardation, distinctive craniofacial malformations, and/or other physical abnormalities.
Before birth, there may be excessive fluid in the amniotic sac (polyhydramnios), which is the thin-walled membrane surrounding the developing fetus during pregnancy. In addition, some infants with Chromosome 14, Trisomy Mosaic may be born prior to 37 weeks’ gestation (premature infant). (Gestation refers to the period of development from conception to birth. “Full-term” infants are born anywhere from 37 to 42 weeks of gestation.)
Chromosome 14, Trisomy Mosaic may also be characterized by abnormal growth delays before birth (prenatal growth retardation) and a failure to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive) during infancy. In addition, affected individuals typically have psychomotor delays and mental retardation.
The syndrome is also associated with characteristic craniofacial malformations, resulting in a distinctive appearance. Such features may include a prominent forehead; a broad nose; an unusually long vertical groove in the center of the upper lip (philtrum); a prominent upper jaw (maxilla); and a small, receding lower jaw (microretrognathia). Various eye (ocular) abnormalities may also be present, such as deeply set and/or widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); abnormal reduction in the size of the eyes (microphthalmia); narrow eyelid folds (palpebral fissures); mild drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis); and/or a translucent film over the eyes.  Affected infants may also have small, low-set, abnormally folded ears; a wide mouth and thick lips; incomplete closure (clefting) or unusually high arching of the roof of the mouth (palate); and/or a short, wide neck.  In addition, in some cases, the face may appear relatively dissimilar from one side to the other (facial asymmetry).
Many infants with Chromosome 14, Trisomy Mosaic also have structural abnormalities of the heart that are present at birth (congenital heart defects), particularly tetralogy of Fallot.  This congenital defect is characterized by a combination of distinctive heart (cardiac) malformations.  These include an abnormal opening in the partition (septum) that separates the two lower chambers (ventricles) of the heart; obstruction of the proper outflow of blood from the lower right ventricle due to narrowing of the opening between the ventricle and the pulmonary artery (pulmonary stenosis); displacement of the aorta, enabling oxygen-depleted blood to flow from the right ventricle to the aorta; and thickening (hypertrophy) of the heart muscle (myocardium) of the right ventricle.  (The pulmonary artery transports oxygen-depleted blood from the right ventricle to the lungs, where the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide occurs.  The aorta, the major artery of the body, arises from the left ventricle and supplies oxygen-rich blood to most arteries.)  Associated symptoms and findings may include insufficient oxygen supply to body tissues (hypoxia), bluish discoloration of the skin and mucous membranes (cyanosis), shortness of breath (dyspnea), feeding difficulties, failure to thrive, and/or other abnormalities.  In some instances, Chromosome 14, Trisomy Mosaic may be associated with other cardiac defects.  In severe cases, congenital heart disease may lead to potentially life-threatening complications.
In some individuals with the syndrome, additional physical abnormalities may also be present.  For example, according to reports in the medical literature, many infants with Chromosome 14, Trisomy Mosaic have had areas of abnormally increased skin pigmentation (hyperpigmentation) that may appear in a linear, spirallike (whorl), patchy, or netlike (reticular) distribution.  Additional physical findings associated with the syndrome have included genital malformations in affected males, including undescended testes (cryptorchidism) and/or an abnormally small penis; body asymmetry, such as dissimilarity in the length of the arms or the legs (limb length asymmetry); and/or other skeletal abnormalities, such as dislocation of the hips, overlapping of certain fingers or toes, and/or other features.

