Chromosome 14 Ring

synonyms:
r14Ring 14Ring Chromosome 14

overview:
Chromosome 14 Ring is a rare disorder that is characterized by abnormalities of the 14th chromosome. Affected infants and children typically have delays in the acquisition of skills that require the coordination of physical and mental activities (psychomotor delays), mental retardation, growth delays, and episodes of uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain (seizures). The disorder is also characterized by distinctive abnormalities of the head and facial (craniofacial) area. Such abnormalities may include an unusually small head (microcephaly) with a high forehead; an elongated face; widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); a thin upper lip; a flat nasal bridge with a prominent nasal tip; and large, low-set ears.

symptoms:
The symptoms and findings associated with Chromosome 14 Ring may vary in range and severity from case to case.  However, in many individuals with the disorder, such abnormalities may include growth delays before and after birth (prenatal and postnatal growth retardation), diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), feeding difficulties during infancy, psychomotor delays, and mental retardation.  In addition, recurrent seizures (epilepsy) typically develop beginning during infancy or early childhood.  The specific form a seizure takes and its associated symptoms may vary, depending upon the region(s) of the brain affected and other factors.  For example, seizure episodes may be characterized by shock-like contractions of certain muscles or muscle groups (myoclonic seizures); increased stiffness (rigidity) and rapid, rhythmic contraction and relaxation of certain muscle groups (tonic-clonic seizures); sensory or behavioral disturbances; lost consciousness; and/or impaired control of certain voluntary functions, such as bowel or bladder control.  (For more information, please choose “epilepsy” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
Individuals with Chromosome 14 Ring may also have characteristic abnormalities of the head and facial (craniofacial) area, resulting in a distinctive facial appearance.  These abnormalities may include a small head (microcephaly) with a high forehead; an elongated face; and a flat nasal bridge with a prominent nasal tip and slightly upturned nostrils (anteverted nares).  The eyes may be widely spaced (ocular hypertelorism) with downwardly slanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures) and vertical skin folds covering the eyes’ inner corners (epicanthic folds).  Affected individuals may also have additional characteristic features, such as a thin upper lip; downwardly turned corners of the mouth; a highly arched roof of the mouth (palate); an unusually small jaw (micrognathia); and large, low-set ears.
Chromosome 14 Ring may also be characterized by other physical abnormalities, including a short neck with excessive skin folds; abnormal skin ridge patterns (dermatoglyphics), such as the presence of a single crease across the palm (simian crease); widely spaced nipples; and abnormalities of skin coloration (pigmentation).  These may include vitiligo, a chronic condition in which patches of skin lose pigmentation, or the presence of cafe-au-lait spots, which are light brown or pale tan discolorations of the skin.  (For more information, please choose “vitiligo” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)  Some affected individuals may also have abnormalities of the nerve-rich membrane that forms the innermost region of the eye (retina), such as abnormalities of retinal pigmentation.
In some cases, certain additional abnormalities may also be associated with Chromosome 14 Ring.  For example, in addition to seizures, other neurological symptoms may sometimes be present, such as an impaired ability to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia) or rhythmic involuntary movements of a part or parts of the body (tremor) that occur or may increase with certain goal-directed voluntary actions (intention tremor).  In addition, in some affected individuals, certain joints may become permanently flexed or extended in fixed postures (joint contractures).  Abnormalities of the heart may also be present at birth (congenital heart defects), such as narrowing (stenosis) of the major artery that carries oxygenated blood to the body (aorta) or the artery that transports oxygen-depleted blood to the lungs (pulmonary artery).  Individuals with Chromosome 14 Ring may also be susceptible to repeated respiratory infections.

