Chromosome 10, Distal Trisomy 10q

synonyms:
chromosome 10, partial trisomy 10q24-qterchromosome 10, trisomy 10q2distal duplication 10qdistal trisomy 10q syndromedup(10q) syndrome

overview:
Chromosome 10, distal trisomy 10q is an extremely rare chromosomal disorder in which the end (distal) portion of the long arm (q) of one chromosome 10 (10q) appears three times (trisomy) rather than twice in cells of the body. The disorder is characterized by unusually slow growth before and after birth); abnormally diminished muscle tone (hypotonia); mild to severe intellectual disability; and mild to severe delays in the acquisition of skills requiring coordination of mental and muscular activities. Affected infants and children may also have distinctive malformations of the head and facial (craniofacial) area; defects of the hands and/or feet; and/or skeletal, heart (cardiac), kidney (renal), and/or respiratory (pulmonary) abnormalities. The range and severity of symptoms and physical findings may vary from person to person, depending upon the exact length and location of the duplicated portion of chromosome 10q. In most cases, chromosome 10, distal trisomy 10q is due to a chromosomal balanced translocation in one of the parents.

symptoms:
In individuals with chromosome 10, distal trisomy 10q, an extremely rare chromosomal disorder, the end (distal) portion of the long arm (q) of one chromosome 10 (10q) is duplicated (trisomic). Symptoms and physical characteristics associated with the disorder may vary greatly in range and severity, depending upon the exact size and location of the duplicated portion of chromosome 10q. However, in most patients, the disorder is characterized by mild to severe intellectual disability; distinctive malformations of the head and facial (craniofacial) area; also, there are sometimes defects of the hands and/or feet; and/or skeletal, heart (cardiac), kidney (renal), and/or respiratory (pulmonary) abnormalities. It is important to note that affected infants will not have all of the abnormalities listed below.
In most cases, chromosome 10, distal trisomy 10q is characterized by abnormally slow growth before and after birth. In addition, most affected infants and children have mild to severely diminished muscle tone (hypotonia). Some may have abnormal looseness or laxity of the joints (generalized hyperlaxity). Infants and children with chromosome 10, distal trisomy 10q also have mild to severe intellectual disability and may experience profound delays in the acquisition of skills that require coordination of mental and muscular activities).
In addition, infants and children with the disorder have characteristic malformations of the head and facial (craniofacial) area. Such abnormalities may include an abnormally small head (microcephaly) with a high, broad forehead; a round, slightly flattened face; prominent cheekbones; and/or low-set, misshapen ears that may appear rotated toward the back of the head (posteriorly rotated). Affected infants and children may also have a small nose with turned up nostrils (anteverted nares) and a broad, flat, and/or depressed nasal bridge; a small, bow-shaped mouth with a prominent upper lip; an unusually small lower jaw; and/or, in some patients, incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate). Additional features may include unusually fine, highly arched eyebrows; drooping of the upper eyelid(s) (ptosis); abnormal narrowing of the eyelid folds (palpebral fissures) between the upper and lower eyelids (blepharophimosis); and/or vertical skin folds that may cover the eyes’ inner corners (epicanthal folds). In some cases, according to the medical literature, the presence of epicanthal folds may cause the eyes to appear widely spaced (ocular hypertelorism). In addition, in some affected infants and children, the eyes may appear abnormally small (microphthalmia) due to reduced diameter of the cornea, the front, clear portion of the eye through which light passes.
In some cases, infants and children with chromosome 10, distal trisomy 10q also have characteristic malformations of the hands and/or feet. Such abnormalities may include permanent flexion (camptodactyly) and/or overlapping of certain fingers; an unusually large distance between the great toes (hallux) and the second toes; webbing (syndactyly) between the second and third toes; and/or abnormal positioning of the feet (i.e., rocker-bottom feet). Affected infants and children may also have abnormal skin ridge patterns including underdeveloped (hypoplastic) ridge patterns on the hands and feet and/or abnormal deep grooves in the soles of the feet (plantar furrows).
Many infants and children with the disorder may also have additional skeletal abnormalities. Affected individuals may have abnormally thin ribs, 11 rather than 12 rib pairs, an abnormally short neck, abnormal front-to-back and side-to side curvature of the spine (kyphoscoliosis), and/or abnormal depression of the sternum, the bone forming the center of the chest (“funnel chest” or pectus excavatum). Affected infants and children may also exhibit abnormally delayed, immature bone development (delayed bone age). In some cases, underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the shin bone (tibia) and/or the thigh bone (femur).
Approximately half of infants with chromosome 10, distal trisomy 10q may have defects of the heart that are present at birth (congenital heart defects), respiratory abnormalities, and/or malformations of the kidneys. Symptoms associated with congenital heart defects may vary greatly depending upon the exact nature, size, and location of the anatomical defect present. In some cases, associated symptoms and physical findings may include breathlessness due to the heart’s inability to pump blood effectively (heart failure); easy fatigability; bluish discoloration of the skin and mucous membranes (cyanosis) due to insufficient oxygen supply to these tissues; and/or increased susceptibility to repeated infections of the lungs (pneumonia). Renal malformations associated with chromosome 10, distal trisomy 10q may include underdevelopment of the kidneys (hypoplasia); development of cysts (cystic kidneys); and/or abnormal swelling (distention) of and accumulation of urine in the kidneys (hydronephrosis) and the tubes (ureters) that bring urine to the bladder (hydroureter). In severe cases, cardiac, respiratory, and/or renal abnormalities may result in life-threatening complications during the first years of life.
In some cases, infants and children with chromosome 10, distal trisomy 10q may have additional abnormalities. In approximately half of affected males, one or both of the testes may fail to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism).

