Chromosome 4, Monosomy Distal 4q

synonyms:
4q Deletion Syndrome, PartialChromosome 4, 4q Terminal Deletion SyndromeChromosome 4, Partial Monosomy 4qDel(4q) Syndrome, PartialDistal 4q MonosomyDistal 4q- Syndrome

overview:
Chromosome 4, Monosomy Distal 4q is a rare chromosomal disorder in which there is deletion (monosomy) of a portion of the 4th chromosome. Associated symptoms and findings may be variable, depending upon the specific length and location of the deleted portion of chromosome 4. However, characteristic features include growth deficiency after birth (postnatal growth retardation), varying degrees of mental retardation, malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region, structural heart defects, abnormalities of the hands and feet, and/or other physical findings. Chromosome 4, Monosomy Distal 4q usually appears to result from spontaneous (de novo) errors very early during embryonic development that occur for unknown reasons (sporadically).

symptoms:
As mentioned above, the symptoms and physical findings associated with Chromosome 4, Monosomy Distal 4q may be variable.  However, in many cases, the disorder is characterized by distinctive malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region, structural malformations of the heart that are present at birth (congenital heart defects), abnormalities of the hands and feet, and/or other physical abnormalities.  In addition, individuals with the disorder are typically affected by mild, moderate, or severe mental retardation and delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and physical activities (psychomotor retardation).
Although the birth weight is usually normal in those with Chromosome 4, Monosomy Distal 4q, most affected infants have growth deficiency after birth (postnatal growth retardation).  Some infants also have low muscle tone (hypotonia) and/or sudden episodes of uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain (seizures).
Characteristic craniofacial abnormalities associated with Monosomy Distal 4q may include a small head (microcephaly); a short nose with a low nasal bridge and upturned nostrils (anteverted nares); and/or low-set, pointed ears.  In addition, many with the disorder have an abnormally small, receding lower jaw (microretrognathia) and incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate) that, in some cases, may be associated with downward displacement or retraction of the tongue (glossoptosis).  The association of microretrognathia, cleft palate, and glossoptosis may be referred to as “Pierre-Robin syndrome” or “Robin malformation sequence.”  The malformations associated with Pierre-Robin syndrome may lead to feeding and breathing difficulties in the newborn (neonatal) period.  Associated abnormalities may include impaired sucking and swallowing, failure to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive), upper airway obstruction, sudden absence of spontaneous breathing (apnea), insufficient oxygen supply to body tissues (hypoxia), inflammation of the lungs due to entrance of food particles or other foreign matter into the lungs’ air passages (aspiration pneumonia), and/or other abnormalities.
Chromosome 4, Monosomy Distal 4q may also be associated with additional craniofacial malformations.  These may include widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); upwardly slanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures); vertical skin folds that may cover the eyes’ inner corners (epicanthal folds); and/or an abnormal groove in the upper lip (cleft lip).  In addition, in some cases, the shape of the forehead may appear dissimilar from one side to the other (forehead asymmetry).
According to reports in the medical literature, over 60 percent of affected infants also have congenital heart (cardiac) defects.  Most frequently, such cardiac defects include an abnormal opening in the partition (septum) that normally separates the lower chambers (ventricles) or the upper chambers (atria) of the heart (ventricular or atrial septal defects [VSDs or ASDs]).  Additional cardiac defects reported in association with the disorder have included abnormal narrowing (stenosis) of the opening between the pulmonary artery and the right ventricle (pulmonary stenosis); abnormal narrowing of the aorta (aortic coarctation) or of the opening between the aorta and the left ventricle (aortic stenosis); patent ductus arteriosus (PDA); or tetralogy of Fallot.  In PDA, the channel that is present between the pulmonary artery and the aorta during fetal development fails to close after birth.  (The pulmonary artery transports oxygen-depleted blood from the right ventricle to the lungs, where the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide occurs.  The aorta, the major artery of the body, arises from the left ventricle and supplies oxygen-rich blood to most arteries.)  Tetralogy of Fallot refers to a combination of heart defects, including ventricular septal defect; pulmonary stenosis; displacement of the aorta, enabling oxygen-depleted blood to flow from the right ventricle to the aorta; and thickening (hypertrophy) of the heart muscle (myocardium) of the right ventricle.  In those with cardiac defects, associated symptoms and findings may vary, depending upon the severity and combination of heart malformations present and other factors.  For example, in some cases, such as those with small isolated VSDs, no symptoms may be apparent.  However, in other instances, such as those with larger VSDs and/or other cardiac defects, associated symptoms and findings may include difficulties feeding, shortness of breath, failure to thrive, excessive sweating, irritability, bluish discoloration of the skin and mucous membranes (cyanosis), and/or other abnormalities.  In some individuals with Monosomy Distal 4q, congenital heart disease and/or respiratory difficulties associated with certain craniofacial malformations (e.g., Pierre-Robin syndrome) may lead to potentially life-threatening complications during infancy or early childhood.
Chromosome 4, Monosomy Distal 4q may also be associated with distinctive abnormalities of the hands and feet.  Such malformations may include abnormal bending (clinodactyly) and tapering of the “pinkies” (fifth fingers), with unusually pointed or duplicated fingernails; implanted thumbs and great toes (halluces); abnormal skin ridge patterns on the palms and the fifth fingers; overlapping toes; and/or deformities in which the feet are twisted out of shape or position (clubfeet).  In some cases, additional musculoskeletal defects may also be present, such as limited extension of the elbows and/or dislocated hips.
In some affected individuals, the disorder may be associated with additional physical abnormalities, including genital, kidney (renal), gastrointestinal, and/or other malformations.

