Chromosome 6 Ring

synonyms:
r6Ring 6Ring 6, Chromosome

overview:
Chromosome 6 Ring is a rare disorder in which there is loss (deletion) of chromosomal material from both ends of the 6th chromosome and joining of the ends to form a ring.  Associated symptoms and findings may vary greatly, depending upon the amount and location of lost chromosomal material and other factors. For example, there have been some reported cases in which children with Chromosome 6 Ring have few physical abnormalities and normal intelligence. However, many with the chromosomal abnormality are affected by growth retardation; varying degrees of mental retardation; mild to severe delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and physical activities (psychomotor retardation); and/or various abnormalities of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region. Such craniofacial features often include an unusually small head (microcephaly), malformed or low-set ears, and/or a small jaw (micrognathia). Eye (ocular) defects are also relatively common, such as drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis), unusually small eyes (microphthalmia), abnormal deviation of one eye in relation to the other (strabismus), and/or other findings. Chromosome 6 Ring usually appears to result from spontaneous (de novo) errors very early in the development of the embryo that occur for unknown reasons (sporadically).

symptoms:
As noted above, associated symptoms and physical features may vary greatly in range and severity.  Some cases have been reported in which children with Chromosome 6 Ring have normal intelligence and minimal physical abnormalities.  However, others with the chromosomal abnormality may be affected by multiple characteristic features of the disorder.  Such features frequently include growth retardation before and after birth (prenatal and postnatal growth retardation) and associated short stature; poor muscle tone (hypotonia), psychomotor delays, and mild to profound mental retardation; craniofacial malformations; and/or ocular defects.  In some cases, additional physical abnormalities may also be present.
Craniofacial malformations commonly associated with Chromosome 6 Ring include an unusually small head (microcephaly); low-set or malformed (dysplastic) ears; a small jaw (micrognathia); a flat nasal bridge; widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); and/or vertical skin folds (epicanthal folds) that may cover the eyes’ inner corners.  Some affected individuals may also have a highly arched roof of the mouth (palate); a short neck that may be webbed or have excessive (redundant) skin; and/or other craniofacial abnormalities.
Chromosome 6 Ring is also frequently associated with additional ocular defects.  These may include drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis); unusually small eyes (microphthalmia); partial absence of ocular tissue from the colored region of the eyes (iris coloboma); abnormal deviation of one eye in relation to the other (strabismus); and/or involuntary, rapid, rhythmic eye movements (nystagmus).  In some cases, other ocular abnormalities may be present, such as absence of the iris (aniridia); unusual largeness of the transparent region forming the front of the eyeball (megalocornea); elevated pressure of the fluid in the eye (glaucoma); and/or degenerative changes of the optic nerve (optic atrophy).  (The optic nerve, also known as the second cranial nerve, transmits impulses from the innermost membrane at the back of the eye [retina] to the brain.)  The degree of potential visual impairment depends upon the severity and/or combination of ocular defects present.
Additional physical abnormalities have been reported in association with Chromosome 6 Ring.  Such findings have included foot deformities (clubfoot); hip dislocation; widely spaced nipples; structural abnormalities of the heart (congenital heart defects); and/or other defects.  In addition, in some cases, neurologic abnormalities may be present, such as absence of the thick band of nerve fibers normally joining the two hemispheres of the brain (agenesis of the corpus callosum); sudden episodes of uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain (seizures); and/or hydrocephalus.  Hydrocephalus refers to obstructed flow or impaired absorption of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), resulting in abnormal accumulation of CSF in the skull, usually under increased pressure.  (CSF is the protective fluid that circulates through the four cavities [ventricles] of the brain, the canal containing the spinal cord [spinal canal], and the space between layers of the protective membranes [meninges] surrounding the brain and spinal cord [i.e., subarachnoid space].)  During infancy or early childhood, hydrocephalus may be associated with rapid enlargement of the head (since bones of the skull have not yet fused); in addition, other findings may include difficulties feeding, vomiting, irritability, lack of normal reflex responses, severe drowsiness, seizures, and potentially life-threatening complications without treatment.

