Cicatricial Alopecia

synonyms:
alopecia cicatrisatascarring  alopeciascarring hair loss

overview:
Cicatricial alopecias are classified as primary or secondary. This discussion is confined to the primary cicatricial alopecias, in which the hair follicle is the target of a destructive inflammatory process. In secondary cicatricial alopecias, destruction of the hair follicle is incidental to a non-follicle-directed process or external injury, such as severe infections, burns, radiation, or tumors.
Primary cicatricial alopecia refers to a diverse group of rare disorders that destroy the hair follicle, replace it with scar tissue, and cause permanent hair loss. Hair loss can be gradual, without symptoms, and unnoticed for long periods. In other cases, the hair loss may be associated with severe itching, pain and burning, and progress rapidly. Cicatricial alopecia occurs in otherwise healthy men and women of all ages and is seen worldwide.

symptoms:
Affected areas of the scalp may have redness, scaling, increased or decreased pigmentation, pustules, or draining sinuses. Other cases may show little signs of inflammation. The inflammation that destroys the follicle is below the skin surface and there is usually no “scar” seen on the scalp, although the affected scalp is usually left bare and smooth without hair and without the usual pore markings.
Cicatricial alopecias are further classified by the type of inflammatory cells that destroy the hair follicle during the active stage of the disease. The inflammation may involve predominantly lymphocytes or neutrophils.
Cicatricial alopecias that involve predominantly lymphocytic inflammation include lichen planopilaris, frontal fibrosing alopecia, central centrifugal alopecia, and pseudopelade (Brocq). Cicatricial alopecias that are due to predominantly neutrophilic inflammation include folliculitis decalvans and tufted folliculitis. Sometimes the inflammation shifts from a predominantly neutrophilic process to a lymphocytic process. Cicatricial alopecias with a mixed inflammatory infiltrate include dissecting cellulitis and folliculitis keloidalis.

