Classic Infantile CLN1 Disease

synonyms:
CLN1INCLInfantile Finnish type neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (Balkan disease)Infantile NCLInfantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosisSantavuori-Haltia DiseaseSantavuori disease

overview:
Summary
Classic infantile CLN1 disease is a rare genetic disorder with an onset of symptoms between 6 and 24 months of age. CLN1 disease is characterized by delays in reaching developmental milestones (developmental delays), twitching or jerking of muscles (myoclonic jerks), seizures, and mild to moderate intellectual disability. As children age, the psychomotor abilities (abilities that require coordination of muscular and mental activity) will deteriorate. Progressive vision loss leading to blindness can also occur. The severe form of CLN1 disease is often fatal during childhood. However, some children do not become ill until later because their genetic defect does not completely abolish the function of the gene and their disease can appear very much like juvenile CLN3 disease.
Classic infantile CLN1 disease belongs to a group of progressive degenerative neurometabolic disorders known as the neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs). These disorders share certain similar symptoms and are distinguished in part by the age at which such symptoms appear. Classic infantile CLN1 disease was previously called infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis or Santavuori disease. The NCLs are characterized by abnormal accumulation of certain fatty, granular substances (i.e., pigmented lipids [lipopigments] ceroid and lipofuscin) within nerve cells (neurons) of the brain as well as other tissues of the body that may result in progressive deterioration (atrophy) of certain areas of the brain, neurological impairment, and other characteristic symptoms and physical findings.
The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses are further classified as lysosomal storage diseases. Lysosomal storage diseases are inherited metabolic diseases that are characterized by an abnormal build-up of various toxic materials in the body’s cells because of enzyme deficiencies. There are more than 50 of these disorders altogether, and they may affect different parts of the body, including the skeleton, brain, skin, heart, and central nervous system. New lysosomal storage disorders continue to be identified. While clinical trials are in progress on possible treatments for some of these diseases, there is currently no approved treatment for many lysosomal storage diseases.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of classic infantile CLN1 disease usually become apparent between 2 and 24 months of age. Infants will develop normally initially, but then become to regress. Their mental and motor development levels off and then begins to decline. Many infants are never able to speak or walk. However, some children do not become ill until later because they still have residual enzyme activity.
Initial symptoms can include signs of intellectual and motor decline including delays in reaching developmental milestones (developmental delays), twitching or jerking of muscles (myoclonic jerks), and seizures. Infants may fail to gain weight and grow as the expected rate (failure to thrive) and may have diminished muscle tone (hypotonia). They may be restless, irritable and have difficulty sleeping through the night. Some infants exhibit microcephaly, a condition that indicates that a child’s head circumference is smaller than would otherwise be expected based on age and gender. Affected infants and children may also exhibit rhythmic, repetitive, predictable movements of their hands called hand stereotypies.
As children age, the psychomotor abilities (abilities that require coordination of muscular and mental activity) will deteriorate. Infants and children may lose interest in playing. Mild to moderate intellectual disability may be present. Some children will develop spasticity, where the muscles become tight and stiff and difficult to move and sometimes painful. Progressive vision loss leading to blindness can also occur.
In infants and children with the severe form, the disorder is often fatal anywhere between the ages of 2 to 9.

