Classic Hereditary Hemochromatosis

synonyms:
bronze diabetesclassic hemochromatosishemochromatosis type IhemosiderosisHFE-related hemochromatosisHHprimary hemochromatosis

overview:
Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is a general term for several rare genetic disorders that are characterized by the accumulation of iron in various organs of the body such as the liver, heart and pancreas. The abnormally stored iron can damage affected organs, potentially causing a variety of different symptoms. The most common form of hemochromatosis is known by several different names including hemochromatosis type I,HFE-related hemochromatosis, hereditary hemochromatosis and classic hereditary hemochromatosis. Iron accumulation in classic hereditary hemochromatosis occurs slowly over many years. Eventually, iron accumulation causes tissue damage and impaired functioning of affected organs. In many affected individuals, symptoms may not become apparent until some point between 40-60 years of age. Onset is usually earlier for men compared to women. Common symptoms include abdominal pain, weakness, lethargy, and unintended weight loss. Without treatment, classic hereditary hemochromatosis can progress to cause serious, life-threatening complications including failure of affected organs.
There are several different disorders associated with excess iron accumulation in the body. Collectively, these different disorders are grouped under the name iron overload disorders. These disorders are caused by mutations to different genes and have different clinical presentations. Classic hereditary hemochromatosis is caused by mutations of theHFEgene. This report primarily deals with classic hereditary hemochromatosis caused by mutation of theHFEgene.

symptoms:
The symptoms of classic hereditary hemochromatosis develop gradually over many years because of the excess accumulation of iron in the body. Symptoms usually become apparent at some point between 40-60 years of age, but may develop early or later. Symptoms rarely develop before 20 years of age. The specific symptoms that occur may vary depending upon the specific organs affected. The severity of the disorder may also vary. Some individuals may have mild, undetected cases, while others have serious complications including organ failure.
It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
Common early symptoms of classic hereditary hemochromatosis include joint inflammation and pain (arthritis) especially in the small joints of the fingers, fatigue, weakness, abdominal pain, unintended weight loss, and an abnormally enlarged liver (hepatomegaly). An abnormally enlarged spleen (splenomegaly) may also occur.
Additional symptoms occur depending on the specific organs involved. In classic hereditary hemochromatosis the liver, pancreas, heart, and skin are most commonly affected and (if left untreated) can potentially lead to serious complications.
Liver abnormalities associated with classic hereditary hemochromatosis include hepatomegaly, and scarring of the liver (cirrhosis), high blood pressure of the branches of the portal vein (portal hypertension), which is the main vein that carries blood from the intestines to the liver. Liver disease can eventually progress to cause liver failure. Early on, some affected individuals may have abnormal liver function tests (e.g., elevated liver enzymes) in the absence of any observable clinical signs. Individuals with classic hereditary hemochromatosis are at a greater risk of developing liver cancer than the general population. A specific form of liver cancer potentially associated with classic hereditary hemochromatosis is hepatocellular carcinoma.
Some HH patients have type 2 diabetes with insulin resistance and high serum insulin. It has been rare to document low serum insulin dependent diabetes in hemochromatosis. In population based studies, there has been no evidence that diabetes is increased in affected individuals who have two copies of the C282Y mutation in theHFEgene.
Individuals with classic hereditary hemochromatosis may experience a variety of heart abnormalities including irregular heart rhythms, enlargement of the heart and disease of the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy). Eventually, affected individuals may experience a limited ability to circulate blood to the lungs and the rest of the body resulting in fluid build-up in the heart, lungs and various body tissues (congestive heart failure).
Progressive darkening of patches of skin (increased skin pigmentation), sometimes referred to as bronzing, is another common finding of classic hereditary hemochromatosis. This condition occurs due to the accumulation of melanin in the skin.
Some men with classic hereditary hemochromatosis may also have underactive testes and some women may have underactive ovaries (hypogonadism). In such cases, the testes and ovaries fail to produce sufficient sex hormones. The pituitary gland may also be affected in individuals with classic hereditary hemochromatosis. In some individuals, the pituitary may fail to produce sufficient amounts of some or all of the hormones it normal produces (hypopituitarism). Hypopituitarism can cause a wide variety of symptoms including fatigue, headaches and abdominal pain. As a result of hormonal deficiencies affected males may experience impotence and affected women may experience loss of menstrual periods (amenorrhea) or early menopause. Some affected individuals may also have loss of interest in sex (decreased libido).
Additional symptoms have been associated with classic hereditary hemochromatosis. These symptoms are common to all individuals as they age. It is not known whether classic hereditary hemochromatosis makes people more susceptible to such symptoms. Such symptoms include loss of the cartilage that normally cushions joints (osteoarthritis), general loss of bone mass (osteoporosis) that can predispose individuals to fractures, an underactive of the thyroid gland (hypothyroidism), shortness of breath, and loss of body hair (outside of normal male pattern baldness).

