Cleidocranial Dysplasia

synonyms:
cleidocranial dysostosisdysplasia, cleidocranialcysplasia, osteodentalMarie-Sainton Disease

overview:
Cleidocranial dysplasia is a rare genetic disorder characterized by abnormal bone formation commonly affecting the skull, teeth and long bones. As a result, short stature, distinctive facial features and narrow, sloping shoulders caused by abnormally developed or absent collarbones (clavicles) may be present in affected individuals. Major features may include premature closing of the soft spot on the head (coronal), delayed closure of the space between the bones of the skull (fontanels), narrow and abnormally shaped pelvic and pubic bones and abnormalities in development of the chest (thoracic region). If not diagnosed at birth, clinical presentation of remarkable features may be most notable in early childhood or adolescence. Additionally, a high arched palate, failure of the lower jaw joints to unite, delayed eruption of teeth and fingers that are irregular in length may also be present. Cleidocranial dysplasia is inherited as an autosomal dominant genetic condition. Approximately 1,000 cases of this disorder have been reported in the medical literature.

symptoms:
Because affected individuals can present with an array of features related to cleidocranial dysplasia, it is not always diagnosed at birth. The most prominent feature of cleidocranial dysplasia is the absence of collarbones or narrow, drooping shoulders caused by complete or partial absence of the collarbones. There may be abnormalities of the muscles in the area of the collarbones associated with an irregularly wide range of shoulder movement in affected individuals with collarbone abnormalities. Another prominent feature is atypical skull formation or skull abnormalities, which may include a premature closure of the two soft spots on the head (fontanels) and the fibrous joints where bones of the skull meet (sutures) causing abnormal development of the skull. Distinct facial features typically include a prominent forehead, unusually wide face, prominent chin, small upper jaw (maxillary hypoplasia) and bulging of the skull cap. Most individuals with cleidocranial dysplasia have some but not necessarily all features listed above and are diagnosed between birth and adolescence as the child develops and abnormalities may become more noticeable over time (irregular growth of long bones or pelvis, atypical facial feature development, abnormal tooth or jaw formation, etc.).
Other bone abnormalities that have been found in some patients with cleidocranial dysplasia may be: a wide pelvic joint, delayed growth of the pubic bone, a hip defect in which the thigh bone angles towards the center of the body (coxa vara), failure of the lower jaw bones to unite, a defect of the hip that causes the thigh bone to angle out to the side of the body (coxa valga), curvature of the spine (scoliosis), a small shoulder blade and/or curvature of the upper legs so that the knees appear unusually close together (genu valgum).
Dental abnormalities may include: a delay in tooth eruption, incomplete development or absence of teeth, underdeveloped enamel and/or extra teeth. Cysts may form around the unerupted or displaced teeth in some people. A high-arch palate or a condition in which there is a hole in the roof of the mouth (cleft palate) may be present.
Individuals with cleidocranial dysplasia have an increased risk for recurrent ear and sinus infections, upper respiratory complications and hearing loss.

