Clostridial Myonecrosis

synonyms:
Clostridium myonecrosisClostridium septicum infectionClostridium perfringens infection

overview:
Clostridial myonecrosis is a serious, life-threatening bacterial infection caused by a small number of Clostridium species of bacteria. Clostridial myonecrosis is broken down into two main forms – traumatic and spontaneous – and the two species most commonly associated with this infection areClostridium perfringens, which is the primary cause of the traumatic form, andClostridium septicum, which is the primary cause of the spontaneous form. The traumatic form most often arises in individuals who have suffered an injury or trauma that hinders or limits blood supply to the area (vascular compromise). The spontaneous form is often associated with individuals whose immune system are weakened or suppressed usually due to an underlying medical condition, most often cancer of the colon or rectum. Other underlying conditions that can be associated with the spontaneous form include blood (hematological) cancers like leukemia, diabetes mellitus, cyclic neutropenia, or individuals whose immune system is suppressed for other reasons.Clostridium septicumis not part of the normal human gut microbiota. It is thought that the associated illnesses cause maladaptation and imbalance (dysbiosis) allowsClostridium septicumto populate the gut. The bacteria can exist within the gastrointestinal system, but are kept under control by the immune system. In some immune-suppressed individuals, the infection can become dangerous.
Clostridial myonecrosis is the term used when these clostridial infections spread to affect deep muscle tissue. A variety of complications can develop including pain, gas gangrene (a condition in which gas production and build up within muscle tissue leads to tissue death [necrosis]), and sepsis, a severe blood infection. These infections eventually progress to cause toxic shock and multiple organ failure. Clostridial myonecrosis is a rapidly progressive, medical emergency that can be fatal despite treatment. Prompt diagnosis and aggressive treatment are essential.

symptoms:
Pain is often the presenting symptom and may be severe and may develop rapidly. In individuals withClostridium perfringensinfection following surgery, pain may arise shortly after the surgical procedure and be disproportionately strong. InClostridium septicuminfection, there is often sudden, severe onset of muscle pain. Sometimes, there is a sensation of heaviness, pressure, or numbness. Some individuals with the spontaneous form may initially show signs of confusion or exhibit a general feeling of poor health (malaise).
In addition to pain, general early signs and symptoms can include fever, fatigue, and dehydration.
Clostridial myonecrosis can cause a specific condition called gas gangrene. Clostridial infection produces toxins in the body. These toxins produce a gas. This gas becomes trapped within deep muscle tissue, specifically the soft tissues. This contributes to tissue death and decay called necrosis.
Because clostridial myonecrosis affects deep muscle tissue initially, the skin near the infection site may be unaffected at first. Eventually, the skin may become pale, and over time usually darkens to reddish or brownish color. Eventually, bullae may form. Bullae are air- or fluid-filled sacs that form under a thin layer of skin. Sometimes, air- or blood-filled blisters called blebs form. Ultimately, the skin may turn a black or dark green color. The affected area may be extremely painful or tender, and there may be a grating or crackling sound (crepitation) from underneath the skin.
Other signs and symptoms can include a foul-smelling discharge from the infection site, localized hardening of affected soft tissue (induration), and swelling due to fluid accumulation (edema). Eventually, the skin may break down and liquify before shedding off (sloughing).
Sometimes, an infection can spread to the aorta, the main artery of the body. This is called aortitis. The wall of the artery may balloon or bulge outward (aneurysm) and there is a risk of the aorta rupturing.
As the infection progresses, sepsis may occur. Sepsis is a widespread blood infection, in which the infections spreads to other areas of the body. The body responds by releasing chemicals to fight off the infection. These chemicals bring about an inflammatory response in the body. Individuals with sepsis can develop a rapid heartbeat (tachycardia), abnormally rapid breathing (tachypnea), low blood pressure (hypotension), and changes in their mental status including greatly dulled awareness or consciousness (stupor). Sepsis can lead to toxic shock, a life-threatening condition characterized by a sudden, high fever, sore throat, vomiting, diarrhea, muscle aches, headaches, confusion, disorientation, a rash, and seizures. Ultimately, multiorgan failure can occur.

