Coats Disease

synonyms:
Coats syndrome

overview:
Coats disease was first described in 1908 and is a rare disorder characterized by abnormal development of the blood vessels in the retina. The retina is a nerve-rich tissue lining the back of the eye that transmits light images to the brain, which allows a person to see. Therefore, affected individuals may experience loss of vision due to changes in the retina and, in severe cases, retinal detachment. In almost all people with Coats disease, only one eye is affected. Rarely, both eyes may be exhibit symptoms, however, one eye is often affected more than the other. The specific cause of Coats disease is not known.

symptoms:
Coats disease affects males more often than females in a ratio of 3:1. The disorder may occur at any age, but the majority of patients are diagnosed in the first two decades of life. Individuals affected with Coats disease may display few or no symptoms while others may have severe involvement. The most common features at presentation of Coats disease include loss of vision, misalignment of the eyes (strabismus), and/or the development of a white reflex rather than the normal red or orange color in the pupil when light is flashed into the pupil so that the pupil appears white (leukocoria).
Eye symptoms result from a developmental malformation, known as telangiectasia, of the blood vessels in the retina. Telangiectasia (tele equals far or end, angio means blood vessel, and ectasia refers to dilation) occurs when there is abnormal widening of groups of small blood vessels, resulting in the leakage of proteins and lipids from the blood. When this occurs in the retina, it is termed exudative retinopathy. This leakage can lead to retinal detachment and the other symptoms discussed above.
Over time, Coats disease may cause detachment of the retina and substantial loss of vision. Additional signs may appear as Coats disease progresses, including elevated pressure inside the eye (glaucoma), clouding of the lens of the eye (cataract), reddish discoloration in the iris due to the growth of new blood vessels in the iris (rubeosis iridis or neovascular glaucoma), shrinking of the affected eyeball (phthisis bulbi), and/or inflammation of eye (uveitis).

