Cogan Reese Syndrome

synonyms:
ICE Syndrome, Cogan-Reese Typeiridocorneal endothelial (ICE) syndrome, Cogan-Reese typeiris naevus syndromeiris nevus syndrome

overview:
Cogan-Reese syndrome is an extremely rare eye disorder characterized by a matted or smudged appearance to the surface of the iris; the development of small colored lumps on the iris (nodular iris nevi); the attachment of portions of the iris to the cornea (peripheral anterior synechiae); and/or increased pressure in the eye (glaucoma). Secondary glaucoma may lead to vision loss. This disorder most frequently appears in young and middle-aged females, usually affecting only one eye (unilateral) and developing slowly over time.
Cogan-Reese syndrome is one of the iridocorneal endothelial (ICE) syndromes, all of which usually affect one eye of young to middle-aged women. The ICE syndromes (essential iris atrophy, Chandler’s syndrome, and Cogan-Reese syndrome) are distinct from one another. However, since these disorders all affect the eye and some of their symptoms overlap, it may be difficult to distinguish between them. These variants may represent different stages of one disease. (For more information on Chandler’s syndrome and essential iris atrophy, see the Related Disorders section of this article.)

symptoms:
Major characteristics of Cogan-Reese syndrome include a matted or smudged appearance to the surface of the iris (nevus), yellow or brown lumps or nodules on the iris (nodular iris nevi), the attachment of portions of the iris to the cornea (peripheral anterior synechiae), and increased pressure in the eye (glaucoma). The development of Cogan-Reese syndrome is gradual, and may be preceded by symptoms of essential iris atrophy and/or Chandler’s syndrome. The matted appearance of the iris and development of nodules on the iris distinguish Cogan-Reese syndrome from the other iridocorneal endothelial syndromes.
Other features of Cogan-Reese syndrome may include swelling of the cornea (corneal edema) and/or abnormalities in the cells lining the cornea (corneal endothelium). These changes may be responsible for the glaucoma that is characteristic of this disorder. Glaucoma may lead to vision loss. The edge of the pupil may turn outward (ectropion uveae) and/or a transparent membrane may appear across the surface of the iris.

