Cohen-Gibson Syndrome

synonyms:
EED-related overgrowthEED-related neurodevelopmental disorder

overview:
Cohen-Gibson Syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by disease-causing changes (pathogenic variants) in theEEDgene. Affected children typically have developmental delays or intellectual disability, tall stature for age, large head size, large hands and feet and facial features that are unusual for their family background.
There is no curative treatment for Cohen-Gibson syndrome. Management focuses on supporting children and young adults as they acquire motor skills, oral communication skills and social skills. Patients with suspected Cohen-Gibson syndrome should be referred to a general pediatrician, and eventually to a clinical geneticist or pediatric neurologist. If a developmental pediatrician is available, detailed developmental assessment is advisable.

symptoms:
Developmental delay (including speech delays/disorders)Intellectual disability (ID)Tall stature for age in childhoodLarge head sizeFacial features that are unusual for family background (e.g. widely spaced eyes)Large hands and feet
Developmental Delay and Intellectual Disability
Many individuals with Cohen-Gibson syndrome have developmental delays. When these delays do not resolve and intellectual disability results, it is typically mild intellectual disability. Some degree of speech and/or language delays (reading, writing) are seen in most patients. The proportion of patients who ultimately live independently as adults is not yet known, as most cases reported so far have been children.
Overgrowth
Tall stature, large hands and feet and large head size are features of generalized overgrowth. Obesity may or may not be a feature in any individual patient. X-rays often reveal “advanced bone age,” where the apparent age of the bones is greater than the patient’s age calculated based on their birth date. The growth spurt at puberty does not appear to be significantly different from average, based on the small number of older patients reported to date. Bone growth typically stops after puberty when the patients reach their final adult height.
Other
Variants in theEEDgene have been reported in the tissue found in cancerous tumours, such as peripheral nerve sheath tumors. However, the degree to which patients who are born with pathogenic variants inEEDin all of their cells (sometimes termed “germline pathogenic variants” or “germline constitutional variants”) is not clear. No specific cancer screening protocols are yet being recommended for patients with Cohen-Gibson syndrome. Nevertheless, patients with unexplained signs or symptoms that do not resolve (e.g. pallor, anemia, abdominal pain, masses in the abdomen, masses in the skin and just under the skin) should be referred to appropriate medical specialists.

