COL4A1A2-Related Disorders

synonyms:
COL4A1/A2 syndromeGould syndrome

overview:
Summary
COL4A1/A2-related disorders are rare, genetic, multi-system disorders. They are typically characterized by abnormal blood vessels in the brain (cerebral vasculature defects), eye development defects (ocular dysgenesis), muscle disease (myopathy) and kidney abnormalities (renal pathology); however, many other aspects of the syndrome including abnormalities affecting the structure of the brain (cerebral cortical abnormalities) and lung (pulmonary) abnormalities continue to emerge and the full spectrum is still uncharacterized. There are notable differences in the specific signs and symptoms (clinical heterogeneity), and different organs are affected to different degrees between patients – even among members of a family who carry the same gene variant.
Abnormal blood vessels in the brain are a major consequence ofCOL4A1andCOL4A2gene variants. The outcomes are highly variable ranging from brain hemorrhage before birth (in utero) leading to cavities in the brain (porencephaly) to mild age-related brain abnormalities that can only be observed on a specialized x-ray called magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). COL4A1/A2-related disorders follow an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance.

Introduction
Collagen type IV alpha 1 (COL4A1) and 2 (COL4A2) are extracellular matrix proteins that together constitute a major component of nearly all basement membranes. The two genes that code for these proteins are tightly linked on chromosome 13 and dominantCOL4A1andCOL4A2gene variants cause a highly variable, multisystem disorder. Mice withCol4a1andCol4a2gene variants have pathology in many organs and the presence and severity of pathology in each organ appears to depend on the location of the gene variant, genetic context and environmental interactions.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms can manifest at almost any age from before birth to old age. Some individuals do not have any observable symptoms (asymptomatic); others can develop severe, even life-threatening complications. Some may only develop specific symptoms such as isolated migraines or strokes in childhood or adulthood. The variability and severity of symptoms is significant and how COL4A1/A2-related disorders will potentially affect an individual can be unique.
Clinical case reports suggest a syndrome with characteristic core findings; however, much about the disorder is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified patients, the lack of large clinical studies and the possibility of other genes or factors influencing the disorder make it challenging to develop a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Therefore, it is important to note that there is a very broad spectrum of clinical presentations with different organs affected to different degrees between patients.
Autosomal Dominant Familial Porencephaly Type IThe first reports of humanCOL4A1gene variants were in patients with autosomal dominant porencephaly and a more recent study found thatCOL4A1variants were found in ~16% of patients with porencephaly. Porencephaly refers to the formation of fluid-filled cysts or cavities within the brain. The size and location of cerebral cavities contributes to clinical variability. In some people, serious, life-threatening complications may occur in infancy; in others, only minor complications may occur, and intelligence is unaffected. Still other individuals may not develop any symptoms until well into adulthood. Symptoms that may occur in individuals with autosomal dominant type I porencephaly include migraines, weakness or paralysis of one side of the body (hemiparesis or hemiplegia), seizures, stroke and dystonia, a group of neurological disorders characterized by involuntary muscle contractions that force the body into abnormal, sometimes painful, movements and positions. Migraines can occur with or without aura. Aura refers to additional neurological symptoms that occur with, or sometimes before, the development of migraine headaches. Affected infants and children can exhibit delays in reaching developmental milestones and varying degrees of intellectual disability. Additional features include poor or absent speech development, facial paralysis (paresis), involuntary muscle spasms (spasticity) that result in slow, stiff, rigid movements, visual field defects and hydrocephalus, a condition in which accumulation of excessive cerebrospinal fluid in the skull causes pressure on the tissues of the brain, resulting in a variety of symptoms.
Autosomal Dominant Brain Small Vessel DiseaseCOL4A1orCOL4A2variants are estimated to underlie approximately 20% of cases of fetal intracerebral hemorrhage. In a retrospective study of 52 patients withCOL4A1variants, stroke occurred in 17.3% and MRI showed white matter abnormalities (63.5%), subcortical microbleeds (52.9%), porencephaly (46%), enlarged spaces around blood vessels, (19.2%) and small infarctions (13.5%). This study clearly demonstrates thatCOL4A1andCOL4A2variants cause clinically variable cerebrovascular disease that includes characteristic features of cerebral small vessel disease. Cerebral small vessel disease with hemorrhage is likely milder continuum from porencephaly and exhibits many of the same symptoms (except for the brain cavities). Affected individuals may have no observable symptoms or only isolated migraines with aura. Some affected individuals may develop weakness or paralysis of one side of the body (hemiparesis or hemiplegia) and have seizures. The main symptom is single or repeated bleeding inside the skull (intracranial hemorrhaging) that can occur without cause (spontaneously), after trauma or when taking drugs that slow blood clotting (anticoagulants).
In addition to the effects of a clearCOL4A1orCOL4A2variant, large genetic studies reported associations ofCOL4A1/A2with intracranial aneurysms, myocardial infarction, arterial calcification, arterial stiffness, deep intracerebral hemorrhages, lacunar ischemic stroke, reduced white matter volume and vascular leukoencephalopathy. Together, these studies suggest that certain unknown variants ofCOL4A1andCOL4A2might contribute to chronic vascular dysfunction. Recent studies using large databases and multi-ancestry meta-analyses reproducibly validate associations of theCOL4A1/A2gene location with cerebral small vessel disease, ischemic stroke and small vessel stroke, even after accounting for high blood pressure (hypertension). Notably,COL4A1andCOL4A2(and to a lesser degreeHTRA1) are the only genes that also cause monogenic cerebral small vessel disease.
Additional Signs and SymptomsMany patients withCOL4A1andCOL4A2variants have additional signs and symptoms that do not include the cerebral vasculature. Some of these patients have been described as having HANAC syndrome, which is an acronym for hereditary angiopathy, nephropathy, aneurysms and muscle cramps. Affected individuals have kidney disease (nephropathy) causing blood in the urine (hematuria) that can either be seen by the naked eye or only visible when tested (microscopic hematuria). Some individuals develop cysts on the kidney. Aneurysms are bulges or enlargements of a blood vessel caused by weakening of the wall of the blood vessel. In most people, small vessel disease in the brain does not cause symptoms. Painful muscle cramps can occur and can develop before three years of age. Various muscles can be affected, and muscle strength can become weakened. However, these findings can be observed independently or in combinations in many patients withCOL4A1andCOL4A2variants.
COL4A1/A2-related disorders can also be associated with a variety of abnormalities affecting the front or back of the eyes. In the front of the eye, patients can have abnormally small eyes (microphthalmia), cataracts (cloudy lenses), and anterior segment dysgenesis (Axenfeld-Rieger). Cataracts, which are a clouding of the lenses of the eyes, are often present from birth (congenital) and may be one of the first identifiable signs of the syndrome. Axenfeld-Rieger is a collection of abnormalities affecting the front of the eye including the iris (colored part of the eye) and cornea (abnormally small corneas called microcornea), which is the transparent membrane that covers the eyes. Developmental defects to the front of the eye, which also includes the ocular drainage structures between the iris and cornea, can lead to increased pressure in the eye (elevated intraocular pressure, or IOP). Acute or chronic IOP elevation can lead to glaucoma where the increased pressure damages the optic nerve causing progressive and irreversible vision loss. In the back of the eye, affected individuals also have twisting or distortion (tortuosity) of arteries in the retina (bilateral retinal arterial tortuosity) as part of the syndrome or as an isolated finding. The retina is the light-sensitive membrane that lines the inside of the eyes. The cells of the retina trigger nerve impulses that run from the optic nerve to the brain to form sight. Abnormal retinal arteries are prone to rupture causing bleeding associated with temporary loss of vision or even retinal detachments that can cause permanent vision loss.
A variety of additional signs and symptoms have been reported in individuals with COL4A1/A2-related disorders including childhood-onset epilepsy, hemolytic anemia (a condition characterized by low levels of circulating red blood cells due to their premature destruction leading to fatigue, weakness, lightheadedness, dizziness, irritability, headaches and pale skin color), mitral valve prolapse (flaps of the valve located between the upper and lower left heart chambers bulge or collapse during contraction allowing leakage of blood back into the left atrium).
Other patients have been reported with cysts on the liver, irregular heartbeats (supraventricular arrhythmia) and Raynaud phenomenon, which is in which the fingers or toes become numb or have a prickly sensation in response to cold due to narrowing of blood vessels.
Congenital Cephalic DisordersIn addition to porencephaly there can be other forms of damage to the brain present at birth. Individuals withCOL4A1orCOL4A2variants can also develop clefts or slits in the two halves of the brain (schizencephaly) in which cerebral hemispheres are missing and replaced with sacs filled with cerebrospinal fluid (hydranencephaly), abnormal folds in the brain surface (polymicrogyria) or abnormalities in the normal laying of the neuronal cells in the brain (cortical lamination defects).

