Cold Agglutinin Disease

synonyms:
CADcold agglutinin hemolytic anemiacold antibody hemolytic anemiacold antibody disease

overview:
Cold agglutinin disease (CAD) is a rare autoimmune disorder characterized by the premature destruction of red blood cells (hemolysis). Autoimmune diseases occur when one’s own immune system attacks healthy tissue. More specifically, CAD is a subtype of autoimmune hemolytic anemia. In this type of disorder, red blood cells are “tagged” by antibodies and are then destroyed by other types of immune cells. The disease is termed “cold” because the antibodies are active and cause hemolysis at cold temperatures, usually 3 to 4oC (37 to 39oF), which is not necessarily the case in other types of autoimmune hemolytic anemia. CAD affects about one person per million every year, and mostly develops between the ages of 40 and 80 years. Normally, the red blood cells have a life span of approximately 120 days before they are destroyed by the spleen. In individuals with CAD, the red blood cells are destroyed prematurely and the rate of production of new cells in the bone marrow can no longer compensate for their loss. A decreased number of red blood cells (anemia) may cause fatigue, weakness, a pale skin color (pallor), dizziness, palpitations, and shortness of breath (dyspnea). Hemolysis leads to an increased release from red blood cells of hemoglobin, a protein responsible for carrying oxygen in the blood. Degradation of hemoglobin into bilirubin can result in yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice). Hemoglobin can also pass in the urine and give it a dark brown color. Other symptoms that can be triggered by exposure to cold include sweating and coldness of the fingers and/or toes (digits) and painful bluish or reddish discoloration of the skin of the digits, ankles, and wrists (acrocyanosis or Raynaud sign). Treatment of CAD includes avoidance of cold temperatures, treating anemia and hemolysis (if needed) and medications that modulate the immune system to decrease the production of antibodies against red blood cells. If applicable, the underlying disease that caused CAD should be treated.

symptoms:
CAD typically develops in individuals between the age of 40 and 80, and is more common in elderly individuals. The symptoms associated with the disease are mostly the result of either hemolysis or circulatory symptoms, both of which are triggered by exposure to cold temperatures. Some individuals, especially those with mild hemolysis and a gradual onset of anemia, may not have any obvious symptoms (asymptomatic). Symptoms of anemia include paleness of the skin (pallor), fatigue, shortness of breath (dyspnea), dizziness and palpitations. In cases of brisk and severe hemolysis, chest pain, decreased alertness (lethargy), confusion, transient loss of consciousness (syncope), and deregulation of heart rate and blood pressure (hemodynamic instability) might occur. Hemolysis also leads to increased release of hemoglobin (an oxygen-carrying protein) in the blood and urine, which can result in darkly pigmented urine. Hemoglobin is degraded into a yellow compound called bilirubin, which can accumulate and lead to yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice). Circulatory symptoms seen in CAD include coldness of the fingers and/or toes (digits) and painful bluish or reddish discoloration of the skin of the digits, ankles, and wrists (acrocyanosis or Raynaud phenomenon). In severe cases, ulcers may develop on the extremities of digits. There is a possibility that people living with CAD are at a higher risk of developing blood clots, although more studies are needed to clarify this potential association. CAD can be a long-standing (chronic) disease, but can be self-limited and clinically silent, especially when associated with infectious diseases (see below); although it can be caused by severe diseases, CAD itself does not seem to be associated with a significantly decreased life expectancy.

