Collagen Type VI-Related Disorders

synonyms:
benign congenital myopathy with contracturesUllrich disease

overview:
Collagen type VI-related disorders encompass two genetic muscle disorders formerly thought to be separate entities: Bethlem myopathy and Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy. Researchers have determined that these disorders represent a disease spectrum associated with disruptions or changes (mutations) in genes that contain instructions to produce (encode) collagen type VI proteins. Bethlem myopathy represents the milder form of this spectrum and Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy represents the severe end. Common symptoms include progressive muscle weakness and degeneration (atrophy) and abnormally fixed joints that occur when thickening and shortening of tissue such as muscle fibers and tendons cause deformity and restrict the movement of an affected area (contractures). Both Bethlem myopathy and Ullrich CMD can be inherited as autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive traits.

symptoms:
The symptoms, severity, and age of onset of collagen type VI-related disorders vary greatly. In most cases, affected individuals have muscle weakness and degeneration and skeletal abnormalities such as curvature of the spine (scoliosis) and contractures.Bethlem Myopathy (Benign Congenital Myopathy with Contractures)Bethlem myopathy is a disorder characterized by mild weakness of the proximal muscles. Proximal muscles are the muscles that are closest to the center of the body such as the muscles of the shoulder, pelvis, and upper arms and legs. Muscle weakness may eventually affect the distal muscles to a lesser degree. Distal muscles are those farther from the center of the body and include the muscles of the lower arms and legs and the hands and feet.
The symptoms of Bethlem myopathy may be apparent before birth (prenatally), shortly after birth (neonatally), or during adolescence or adulthood. In addition to muscle weakness, newborns and infants with Bethlem myopathy may develop diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), repeated mild contractures of certain joints especially the fingers, elbows, ankles, and knees, a twisted or tilted neck (torticollis), and delays in achieving motor milestones.
Bethlem myopathy is slowly progressive. In some adults, noticeable muscle weakness may not occur until after 40 years of age. Many individuals with Bethlem retain the ability to walk either independently or with assistance (e.g., cane or crutches) throughout life. Some individuals may eventually require a wheelchair.
In rare cases, breathing (respiratory) difficulties may occur late in life due to weakness of the diaphragm muscles. Heart (cardiac) function, which may become impaired in other forms of myopathy, is usually unaffected in individuals with Bethlem myopathy.
In some cases, a skin condition may occur that is characterized by thickening and hardening (hyperkeratosis) of hair follicles, resulting in the development of rough, elevated growths (papules) on the skin.
Ullrich Congenital Muscular Dystrophy (UCMD)Ullrich CMD is characterized by diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), weakness and degeneration of the proximal muscles, and abnormally flexible (hyperelastic) joints of the wrists and ankles. Additional early symptoms of Ullrich CMD include the failure to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive), abnormal front-to-back and side-to-side curvature of the spine (kyphoscoliosis), a twisted or tilted neck (torticollis), congenital dislocation of the hip, contractures of the joints, and stiffness (rigidity) of the spine.Intelligence is normal in most cases. The amount of motor development varies from case to case. Some children are able to walk independently; others require assistance to walk. In some cases, affected children may never be able to walk. In addition, some children who develop the ability to walk independently lose that ability because of the progression of the disease (e.g., worsening contractures, rigidity of spine).
Additional symptoms may occur including breathing (respiratory) difficulties and frequent chest infections. Breathing difficulties can result in life-threatening complications and may require respiratory support, especially at night.
As the disorder progress, previously flexible (lax) joints such as those of the wrists and ankles may stiffen. Some affected individuals may exhibit a skin condition characterized by thickening and hardening (hyperkeratosis) of hair follicles, resulting in the development of rough, elevated growths (papules). In some cases, scars may heal slowly or affected individuals may develop hardened, raised bumps at the site of an injury (hypertrophic keloid scars).
Some individuals with Ullrich CMD may have a distinctive facial appearance with a rounded face with prominent ears.

