Common Variable Immune Deficiency

synonyms:
acquired hypogammaglobulinemiacommon variable hypogammaglobulinemiacommon variable immunodeficiencyCVICVIDimmunodeficiency, common variablelate-onset immunoglobulin deficiency

overview:
Common variable immune deficiency (CVID) is a type of primary immunodeficiency, which is defined as an immune system dysfunction typically caused by a variant in a gene or genes. The World Health Organization (WHO) recognizes more than 400 primary immunodeficiencies ranging from relatively common to quite rare.
CVID is one of the most prevalent of the symptomatic primary immunodeficiencies and manifests a wide variability of symptoms and range of severity. While considered a genetic condition, the syndrome consists of a group of diseases, and most of the causes are still unknown. CVID is characterized by low levels of specific proteins (immunoglobulins) in the fluid portion of the blood. This results in a loss of antibodies and a decreased ability to fight invading microorganisms, toxins or other foreign substances. These immunoglobulins are produced by specialized white blood cells (B cells) as they mature into plasma cells.
The cause of CVID is unknown in at least 80% of affected individuals. A genetic cause has been identified in about 30%. Sporadic cases, with no apparent history of the disorder in the family, are the commonest form. These may be caused by a complex interaction of environmental and genetic components (multifactorial inheritance), but genes that are involved in the development and function of immune cells have now been shown to be the primary cause.

symptoms:
The clinical course and symptoms of CVID vary widely from mild to severe. The immunoglobulins affected also vary. For example, some patients have a deficiency in all three major types of immunoglobulins: immunoglobulin G (IgG), immunoglobulin A (IgA) and immunoglobulin M (IgM) while others have a shortage of just IgG and IgA. The diagnosis is made by finding that functional antibodies are very low or absent.
Onset of symptoms, including frequent and unusual infections, may first occur during childhood and adolescence; however, for many patients, the diagnosis may not be made until the third to fourth decade of life.
People with CVID have trouble fighting off infections because of a lack of antibodies which are normally made to resist invading microbes. As antibody production is impaired, vaccines are not effective. Recurrent bacterial infections, particularly affecting the upper and lower respiratory tracts, such as in the lungs, sinuses or ears, are common. Recurrent lung infections can lead to chronic lung disease and potentially life-threatening complications.
Gastrointestinal complications, such as infections or inflammation, are also prevalent. Some patients report abdominal pain, bloating, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and weight loss. Affected individuals may also have an impaired ability to absorb nutrients such as vitamins, minerals, fat and certain sugars from the digestive tract. Individuals with CVID may also experience recurrent or chronic infections (giardiasis) of the small intestine caused by the single-celled parasite called Giardia lamblia.
Individuals with CVID also have an increased susceptibility to certain bacterial gastrointestinal infections (e.g., Campylobacter, etc.) or more recently, norovirus that causes symptoms similar to those associated with giardiasis.
Due to abnormalities in the maturation of B cells and dysregulation of the immune system, some individuals with CVID may have abnormal accumulations of lymphocytes in lymphoid tissues such as lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy) or spleen (splenomegaly). In some people, abnormal growth of small nodules of lymphoid tissue in the gastrointestinal tract (nodular lymphoid hyperplasia) may occur. In addition, an increased percentage of individuals with CVID are more prone to developing certain forms of cancer than the general population such as malignancies of lymphatic tissue (lymphoma) and possibly stomach cancer). The risk of gastric carcinoma is almost 50 times greater in patients with CVID than in other individuals.
In addition, some individuals with CVID may develop granular, inflammatory nodules (noncaseating granulomas) within tissue of the skin, lungs, spleen and/or liver.
Twenty to twenty-five percent of patients with CVID are prone to developing certain autoimmune disorders. Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) and autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) anemia are the most frequently diagnosed conditions. (For more information on these disorders, choose “ITP” and “Anemia, Hemolytic, Acquired Autoimmune” as your search terms in the Rare Disease Database.)
It is not fully understood why CVID patients are at risk for autoimmune disorders. While one would assume that CVID suppresses the immune response, in fact, loss of normal controls in CVID leads to autoimmunity due to an overactive or unrestrained portion of the immune system. This then leads to an attack on the body’s healthy tissues and organs. This phenomenon has long shown that more complex defects in the immune system, beyond qualitative and quantitative defects in antibody production, underlie the diverse clinical manifestations of CVID.

