Complete DiGeorge Syndrome

synonyms:
cDGSDiGeorge syndrome with athymia

overview:
Summary
Complete DiGeorge syndrome is a rare disorder in which children have no detectable thymus (athymia). The thymus is a gland located on top of the heart. The thymus produces specialized white blood cells called T cells that fight infections, especially viral infections. The T cell count is the highest in infants in the first 2 years of life and then slowly decreases with time. In older adults over the age of 60, the thymus is mostly replaced by fat. Children with complete DiGeorge syndrome are born without a thymus and are therefore profoundly deficient in T cells and extremely susceptible to infections. Without treatment, the disorder is usually fatal by two or three years of age.
Introduction
Some individuals have DiGeorge syndrome as part of a larger disorder, specifically chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome or CHARGE syndrome. Both of these disorders have symptoms affecting multiple systems of the body.  DiGeorge syndrome typically refers to individuals who have T cell counts less than the 10th percentile for age, plus they have heart defects and/or low calcium levels. Many but not all of infants with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome and CHARGE syndrome have T cell counts less than the 10th percentile for age and are often referred to as having DiGeorge syndrome. (Children with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome or CHARGE syndrome who have normal T cell counts are not considered as having DiGeorge syndrome.)
Only about 1% of children with DiGeorge syndrome have absence of the thymus. To determine that a child had no thymus, blood testing must not detect T cells emerging from the thymus. Newly developed T cells emerging from the thymus have special proteins on the cell surface.  Those T cells are called “naïve” T cells.  Children with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome or CHARGE syndrome who have very low naïve T cells counts (less than 50 per mm3 in the blood) are said to have complete DiGeorge syndrome.  Children with complete DiGeorge syndrome are all athymic by definition. NORD has individual reports on both 22q11.2 deletion syndrome and CHARGE syndrome patients with athymia. These reports are accessible through the NORD Rare Disease Database. Lastly, for affected infants who are infants of diabetic mothers and other infants with no identifiable genetic defects or syndromes, the cause of athymia remains unknown.

symptoms:
By definition, complete DiGeorge syndrome is characterized by absence or underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the thymus resulting in very low T cell counts. Absence or underdevelopment of the thymus results in an increased susceptibility to viral, fungal and bacterial infections (immunodeficiency). The degree of susceptibility can vary. Specific symptoms will vary depending upon the type of infection, overall health of the infant, and other factors. Respiratory infections are common often leading to respiratory distress. Opportunistic infections are also common. Opportunistic infection refers either to infections caused by microorganisms that usually do not cause disease in individuals with fully functioning immune systems or to widespread (systemic) overwhelming disease by microorganisms that typically cause only localized, mild infections. Not only are affected infants more susceptible to infections, but their bodies cannot effectively fight off the infections either.
Infants with complete DiGeorge syndrome have additional symptoms including congenital heart defects and/or hypoparathyroidism. These complications can be significant. Congenital health defects are problems with the structure of the heart. This include the walls, valves, and arteries and veins of the heart. Over 50 percent of infants with complete DiGeorge syndrome require surgery to fix the heart defects.
Hypoparathyroidism is a rare condition in which the parathyroid glands, that are located in the neck, fail to produce sufficient amounts of parathyroid hormone. Parathyroid hormone plays a role in regulating the levels of calcium and phosphorus in the blood. Due to a deficiency of parathyroid hormone, individuals with hypoparathyroidism may exhibit abnormally low levels of calcium in the blood (hypocalcemia) and high levels of phosphorus.  Low levels of calcium in the blood can result in seizures.  Management of calcium levels can be difficult in infants with complete DiGeorge syndrome. Although infants with partial DiGeorge syndrome usually outgrow the hypoparathyroidism in approximately 12 months, approximately 80% of infants with complete DiGeorge syndrome have long term problems maintaining safe calcium levels.
Some infants have softening of the tissues of the voice box (larynx), a condition called laryngomalacia. This can cause noisy breathing. Sometimes, it can cause difficulties eating.
Infants with chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome and CHARGE syndrome will have additional symptoms that are associated with their specific diagnosis. Infants with complete DiGeorge syndrome who are born to diabetic mothers may also have only one kidney (renal agenesis).
Researchers have identified an atypical form of complete DiGeorge syndrome. Affected infants, in addition to immunodeficiency, have a red, often itchy, rash and enlargement of the lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy). They develop oligoclonal T cells. To understand this process, it can be helpful to think of the thymus as a schoolhouse. In normal children, stem cells from the bone marrow go to the thymus (the “schoolhouse”) to develop into T cells. The developing T cells learn to not attack the infant’s body (self) and to fight infections. If the developing T cells are successful learning these two lessons, they “graduate,” and leave the schoolhouse.  The graduates have special proteins on the surface of the cell and are called “naïve” T cells. After the naïve T cells fight an infection, they lose the special markers and are called memory T cells. Memory T cells can quickly fight an infection if it recurs. In atypical complete DiGeorge syndrome, there is no thymus (no schoolhouse). However, stem cells in the bone marrow develop into a cell that looks like a T cell, but is missing the “naïve” T cell markers. These “atypical” T cells have not gone to “school” and have not learned what is “self.” The atypical T cells then attack the body causing rash, and often also diarrhea or liver damage. The diagnosis of atypical DiGeorge syndrome is made when a patient has the rash and high numbers of T cells but no, or very few, naïve T cells in the blood.

