Complex Regional Pain Syndrome

synonyms:
CRPS

overview:
Summary

Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is a disorder in which pain, occurring spontaneously or from a sensory stimulus, is disproportionately far more painful than it should be. An example of this would be light touching of the skin, which normally is not painful, yet is perceived as extremely painful in CRPS patients. The disproportionate pain is also reflected in normally painful stimuli, such as a pinprick, hurting more than it should (hyperalgesia). CRPS usually affects one limb after a limb injury or surgery. Usually, patients with CRPS will experience limited use of their affected limbs due to the pain. Besides increased perception of pain, other signs and symptoms that are seen with CRPS particularly in its early stages are a warm, red and swollen extremity on the affected side. In its later stages, a cool, bluish and sweaty limb is common. CRPS is often treated with physical and occupational therapy, and the patient will typically require medications or other interventions to manage the pain.

Introduction

CRPS has traditionally been subdivided into 2 categories: type I and type II CRPS. In CRPS type I, there are no nerve injuries or lesions identified. CRPS type I is also known as “reflex sympathetic dystrophy,” and it comprises about 90 percent of all cases of CRPS. CRPS type II (causalgia), on the other hand, is diagnosed when there is evidence of nerve damage.  A new CRPS subdivision has recently been added: CRPS with remission of some features. This label applies to patients who have met the full CRPS diagnostic criteria detailed below in the past, but who currently display insufficient CRPS features to meet the full criteria (i.e., ongoing CRPS-related pain and features but with some improvement).

symptoms:
The most common and prominent symptom of CRPS is the pain that affected individuals will feel. The pain is often deep inside the limbs with a burning, stinging or tearing sensation. Sensory changes are also common, and may include increased sensitivity to painful stimuli, feeling pain from stimuli that are usually non-painful and, in some instances, sensory loss (e.g., numbness).
In addition to pain, patients commonly experience an affected extremity that is warm, red and swollen, at least initially. In many patients, as CRPS continues, the affected extremity may more often feel cool with dark or bluish skin. Swelling, resulting from fluid build-up in the limb (edema), can be present regardless of the color and temperature of the skin, but is typically more prominent with the early clinical picture (red and warm skin). Skin color and temperature may sometimes change even over short periods of time inconsistently. In addition to the changes above, CRPS patients may experience skin that becomes thin and shiny and may experience either increased or decreased hair and nail growth in the affected extremity.
Most patients will experience motor impairment, which is the decrease in the ability to use the limbs for movement, with weakness or limited range of motion being the most common impairments. The impairments may be seen in a reduction in strength in handgrip or during tiptoe-standing. Some patients may develop spasms or even uncontrollable muscle contractions (dystonia).

