Cone Dystrophy

synonyms:
retinal cone degenerationretinal cone dystrophy

overview:
Summary
Cone dystrophy is a general term used to describe a group of rare eye disorders that affect the cone cells of the retina. Cone dystrophy can cause a variety of symptoms including decreased visual clarity (acuity), decreased color perception (dyschromatopsia), and increased sensitivity to light (photophobia). There are two main forms of cone dystrophy: stationary cone dystrophy and progressive cone dystrophy. In stationary cone dystrophy, symptoms tend to remain stable and are usually present at birth or early childhood. In progressive cone dystrophy, symptoms slowly worsen over time. The age of onset, progression and severity of cone dystrophy can vary greatly from one person to another, even among individuals with the same type of cone dystrophy. Some forms of cone dystrophy are inherited; other forms appear to occur by chance for no apparent reason (sporadically).
A variety of different and confusing names have been used to describe the various forms of cone dystrophy. Some researchers limit the term “cone dystrophy” to the progressive forms of the disorder. Other researchers use cone dystrophy as an umbrella term for both the stationary and progressive forms of cone dystrophy – examples of which include achromatopsia, incomplete achromatopsia, blue cone monochromatism and X-linked progressive cone dystrophy. This report is a general overview of stationary and progressive cone dystrophy. For more specific information on an individual form of cone dystrophy, use the disorder’s specific name as your search term in the Rare Disease Database or contact one of the organizations listed in the resources section of this report.

symptoms:
The symptoms of cone dystrophy may vary from one person to another, even among individuals with the same form of the disorder. The age of onset, specific symptoms, severity and progression (if any) can vary greatly. The amount of vision loss varies and is difficult to predict. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case and associated symptoms.
Cone dystrophy results from damage to the cone cells of the retinas. The retinas are the thin layers of nerve cells that line the inner surface of the back of the eyes. The retinas sense light and convert it to nerve signals, which are then relayed to the brain through the optic nerve. The retina has two main types of cells: cones and rods. Cone and rod cells are called photoreceptors because they detect and respond to light stimuli.
Cone cells are located throughout the retina. The highest concentration of cone cells is clustered in the oval-shaped, yellowish area near the center of the retina (macula). Cone cells are involved in the part of vision that enables a person to see fine details, read or recognize faces. Cone cells also play a role in the perception of color. Cone cells function best in bright light. Rod cells are found throughout the retina except in the center. Rod cells enable people to see in low or limited light.
Cone dystrophy is sometimes broken down into two broad groups: stationary and progressive. Stationary cone dystrophy is usually present during infancy or early childhood and symptoms usually remain the same throughout life. In progressive cone dystrophy, associated symptoms become worse over time. Progressive cone dystrophy usually develops in late childhood or early during adulthood. However, the rate of progression and age of onset can vary greatly from one person to another.Damage to cone cells can result in decreased clarity of vision (reduced visual acuity) when looking straight ahead (central vision), a reduced ability to see colors and an abnormal sensitivity to light (photophobia). Some affected individuals may not be able to see color at all and some may develop rapid, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus).
In the progressive form of cone dystrophy, vision continues to deteriorate over time. In many cases vision may deteriorate so that a person is considered “legally” blind (i.e., vision that is 20/200 or worse). Complete blindness is uncommon in individuals with cone dystrophy. Side (peripheral) vision is usually unaffected as well. Individuals with cone dystrophy can usually see well at night or in low light situations because the rod cells are usually unaffected. In rare cases, late in the disease course, some rod cells may become involved.

