Congenital Pulmonary Lymphangiectasia

synonyms:
CPLPPLprimary pulmonary lymphangiectasiapulmonary cystic lymphangiectasis

overview:
Congenital pulmonary lymphangiectasia (CPL) is a rare developmental disorder that is present at birth (congenital). Affected infants have abnormally widened (dilated) lymphatic vessels within the lungs. The lymphatic system helps the immune system in protecting the body against infection and disease. It consists of a network of tubular channels (lymph vessels) that drain a thin watery fluid known as lymph from different areas of the body into the bloodstream. Lymph accumulates in the tiny spaces between tissue cells and contains proteins, fats, and certain white blood cells known as lymphocytes.
Infants with CPL often develop severe, potentially life-threatening, respiratory distress shortly after birth. Affected infants may also develop cyanosis, a condition marked by abnormal bluish discoloration of the skin that occurs because of low levels of circulating oxygen in the blood. The exact cause of CPL is unknown.
CPL can occur as a primary or secondary disorder. Primary pulmonary lymphangiectasia can occur as isolated congenital defect within the lungs or as part of a generalized form of lymphatic vessel malformation (lymphangiectasia) that affects the entire body, usually associated with generalized lymphedema. Secondary CPL occurs secondary to a variety of heart (cardiac) abnormalities, and/or lymphatic obstructive forms.

symptoms:
Much of the older medical literature suggests that CPL has an extremely high mortality rate. However, recent studies suggest that the disorder does not have as poor a prognosis as described and that symptoms may improve with age in some cases.
Symptoms associated with CPL often develop during the newborn (neonatal) period shortly after birth. During intrauterine period, the occurrence of non-immune hydrops fetalis associated with pleural effusion may be linked to CPL. In some cases, symptoms develop later during infancy. The symptoms of CPL vary in severity from case to case; in most cases, the earlier the presentation the more severe the symptoms.
Affected infants often develop severe respiratory failure and abnormal bluish discoloration of the skin that occurs because of low levels of circulating oxygen in the blood (cyanosis). Infants with CPL may also exhibit coughing or wheezing, progressive difficulty breathing (dyspnea), coughing up blood (hemoptysis), and swelling due to accumulation of lymphatic fluid (lymphedema). Affected infants may exhibit growth failure during infancy.
Additional symptoms eventually develop including an abnormally rapid rate of breathing (tachypnea), chylous pleural effusion, known as chylothorax and recurrent respiratory infections. Chyle is a fat-laden cloudy fluid that is absorbed during digestion by the lymphatic vessels located around the intestine. Chylothorax is the accumulation of chyle or lymph fluid in the pleural cavity. Chyle is composed by fats (mainly phospholipids), proteins (albumin in particular), and a significant amount of lymphocytes. Chyle normally flows through lymphatic vessels into the upper chest (thoracic duct) and is then deposited into veins, where it mixes with blood. In some cases, chyle may accumulate in the abdomen causing chylous ascites.
Some infants with CPL may develop heart abnormalities including a limited ability to circulate blood to the lungs and the rest of the body resulting in fluid buildup in the heart, lung and various body tissues (congestive heart failure).
Some infants with CPL develop gastroesophageal reflux, a digestive disorder characterized by the passage or flowing back (reflux) of the contents of the stomach or small intestines (duodenum) into the esophagus. The esophagus is the tube that carries food from the mouth to the stomach (esophagus). Symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux may include a sensation of warmth or burning rising up to the neck area (heartburn or pyrosis), swallowing difficulties (dysphagia), and chest pain. This problem is a possible complication of CPL, but not a direct consequence or typical symptom.

