Congenital Leptin Deficiency

synonyms:
obesity due to congenital leptin deficiencyLEPDleptin deficiency or dysfunctionobesity, morbid due to congenital leptin deficiencyCLDleptin deficiency

overview:
Summary
Congenital leptin deficiency (CLD) is a rare, inherited condition that affects how the body processes energy, responds to food and stores fat. Infants with CLD are constantly hungry and quickly gain weight and become obese. Children with CLD have extreme hunger (hyperphagia), low energy and abnormal behaviors related to food. People affected with CLD produce little or no sex hormones (hypogonadotropic hypogonadism) resulting in late or absent puberty and infertility. CLD is caused by changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in theLEPgene, which is responsible for making a protein called leptin. Leptin is important for regulating appetite and growth of body fat. This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Diagnosis is based on a clinical examination, symptoms and the results of genetic testing. Diet, behavior modification, exercise programs and bariatric surgery have been used to help manage the symptoms of CLD. Treatment is available for this condition using a drug called metreleptin, a recombinant form of human leptin, which reverses the symptoms of CLD. With treatment, people with CLD develop a normal appetite, lose weight and fat and regain normal sex hormone levels.
Introduction
CLD is rare, making it difficult to predict exactly how it will affect someone who is newly diagnosed. It is one of several conditions that include early-onset obesity, and these conditions can be difficult to distinguish from each other without a careful physical examination and genetic testing.

symptoms:
Most babies with CLD have a normal weight at birth. The earliest symptoms of CLD are constant hunger and excessive eating leading to rapid weight gain and obesity before one year of age. People with CLD always feel hungry even after eating a full meal and often have abnormal behaviors related to food. Many have low levels of sex hormones (hypogonadotropic hypogonadism) causing delayed or absent puberty and infertility. Other symptoms include low energy levels, low blood pressure and insulin resistance, which can lead to type 2 diabetes. Children with CLD are often prone to infections, due to an immune system that doesn’t work correctly. Excessive weight gain can lead to other symptoms such as abnormal bone growth, liver disease and difficultly walking.

