Congenital Heart Block

synonyms:
atrioventricular (AV) blockCHB

overview:
Congenital heart block (CHB), or atrioventricular block (AVB), is characterized by interference of the transfer of the electrical nerve impulses (conduction) that regulate the normal and rhythmic pumping action of the heart muscle. The severity of such conduction abnormalities varies among affected individuals.
The normal heart has four chambers. The two upper chambers are the atria and the two lower chambers are the ventricles. In order for the heart to contract and pump blood to the body, it needs an electrical stimulus to signal contraction. The SA (sinoatrial) node, which is located in the right atrium, acts as a natural pacemaker that initiates and controls the heartbeat. The electrical stimulus travels from the SA node in the atrium to the ventricles along a very specific path of conducting tissue via the AV (atrioventricular) node located at the junction between the atria and ventricles. The AV node mediates proper transmission between the top and bottom chambers so that every atrial contraction is accompanied by ventricular contraction. To allow for ventricular contraction, the signal travels down the bundle branches in the His-Purkinje system, which is the electrical pathway located in the septum (the heart muscle between the two ventricles). To summarize, the SA node allows for atrial contraction, the AV node allows for transmission of the signal between the atria and ventricles, and the His-Purkinje system allows for ventricular contraction. As long as the electrical impulse is transmitted normally, the heart behaves and contracts normally allowing for blood to be pumped out to the body.
If the transmission of the signal is impeded, the blocked electrical transmission is known as a heart block or an AV block. The disturbance may be transient or permanent. This condition does not affect the flow of blood and does not lead to the blockage of coronary arteries (which would lead to a heart attack). It is an electrical problem rather than a hydraulic one.
Heart blocks are categorized according to the degree of impairment of the patient and the pattern of conduction abnormality. The categories are first, second, and third degree heart block. Second degree heart block is further characterized into two types: Mobitz type I and Mobitz type II. CHB can happen at any age but is termed congenital when it occurs in the fetus or newborn up to 28 days of life. Individuals may progress from one type of heart block to a more severe degree.

symptoms:
The presentation of congenital heart block varies with age of onset, underlying etiology, and type of heart block.
In newborns affected by CHB, the primary finding is a slow heart rate (bradycardia). Individuals may also appear pale or diaphoretic, have intermittent gallops and murmurs, and show signs of congestive heart failure (e.g. crackles in lungs, peripheral edema, etc.).
Some individuals may present with CHB later in childhood. The primary finding is also a slow heart rate (bradycardia), which may or may not be present with bradycardia-related symptoms such as decreased exercise tolerance and presyncope or syncope (Stokes-Adams attacks). Heart block may be intermittent at first and become persistent over time.
In first degree heart block, the two upper chambers of the heart (atria) beat normally, but the contractions of the two lower chambers (ventricles) slightly lag behind because it takes a longer time for the electrical impulse to move from the SA node to the AV node. If the time taken for the impulse to move from the atria to the ventricles is longer than 0.2 seconds, but no other abnormalities are present, first degree heart block is present. Most people with this mild form of the disorder do not experience any symptoms (asymptomatic). Some affected individuals may fatigue quickly and experience difficulty breathing (dyspnea).
Second degree heart block is characterized by dropped or skipped beats. This signifies that some signals sent from the SA node in the atrium do not reach the ventricles because they are “blocked” or “stopped” at the AV node. Therefore, not all contractions of the atria will be followed by contractions of the ventricles. This form of the disorder may be separated into two subgroups which have different presentations: Mobitz type I (Wenckebach) and Mobitz type II.
In Mobitz type I AV block, there is a progressive delay between heartbeats until a beat is dropped or skipped. Because the consequences are usually limited to short-term dizziness and modest fatigue, the condition is not considered dangerous and has excellent prognosis.
Mobitz type II AV block is more rarely encountered and usually carries greater risks. It is characterized by an extremely low heart rate because most of the electrical impulses generated by the SA node in the atrium cannot get to the ventricles. Thus, the number of heartbeats is reduced. Often, affected individuals may fatigue quickly and/or experience difficulty breathing (dyspnea) and/or episodes of unconsciousness (syncope). It is, however, not uncommon for affected individuals to be symptomless (asymptomatic). In some people, a pacemaker may be inserted into the upper chest to restore normal heart rhythm.
In third degree or complete heart block, none of the electrical signals from the SA node in the upper chamber reach the lower chambers. In order for the ventricles to contract, the His-Purkinje system (bundles of specialized nerves in the electrical conduction system) takes over as a natural pacemaker in the lower chambers. Thus, the atria and ventricles beat independently of one another and are not in sync because they are controlled by two different areas that do not communicate (the SA node controls the atria and the His-Purkinje system controls the ventricles). Individuals with complete heart block may experience episodes of unconsciousness (syncope), breathlessness, lack of energy (lethargy), and/or low blood pressure (hypotension). In addition, complete heart block may be associated with an impaired ability of the heart to pump blood effectively (congestive heart failure); chest pain and/or palpitations; episodes of dizziness with or without loss of consciousness due to heart fluttering (fibrillation) or cessation (asystole) of the heart (Stokes-Adams attacks); and/or enlargement of the heart (cardiomegaly). In rare cases, infants born with complete heart block may have abnormal accumulation of fluid within tissues of the body (hydrops fetalis). Treatment with a pacemaker is necessary to restore natural heart rhythm.

