Congenital Hepatic Fibrosis

synonyms:
CHF

overview:
Congenital hepatic fibrosis (CHF) is a rare disease that is present at birth (congenital) and affects the liver. CHF rarely occurs as an isolated problem, and is usually associated with ciliopathies that affect the kidneys, called hepatorenal fibrocystic diseases (FCD). These include polycystic kidney disease (PKD), nephronophthisis (NPHP) chronic tubulointerstitial disease, and others. Typical liver abnormalities include an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly), increased pressure in the venous system that carries blood from different organs to the liver (portal hypertension), and fiber-like connective tissue that spreads over and through the liver (hepatic fibrosis). Gastrointestinal (stomach and intestine) bleeding, splenomegaly (enlarged spleen) and hypersplenism (decreased platelet and other blood counts due to enlarged spleen) may be early signs of this condition.

symptoms:
The more obvious symptoms are a swollen abdomen, a firm, slightly enlarged and abnormally shaped liver and vomiting blood (hematemesis) due to bleeding from the enlarged blood vessels (varices) under the inner lining of the esophagus, stomach, and intestines. There is an increased risk for inflamed bile ducts (cholangitis) as well. The main findings in this disorder are identified through diagnostic testing. Many of the following signs are present in affected individuals with this disorder:
Portal Hypertension: increased pressure in the venous system that carries blood from multiple organs to the liver (portal system). This increased blood pressure is caused by the probable congenital abnormality of the portal vein as well as blockage of the portal blood supply to the liver due to excess connective tissue growth in the liver. Portal hypertension can cause enlargement of the spleen and swollen or dilated veins of the esophagus. Hepatic Fibrosis: a fiber-like connective tissue that spreads through the liver. Nephromegaly: enlarged kidney. Gastrointestinal Bleeding: bleeding from the esophagus, and/or stomach and intestines that may cause the affected individual to vomit red blood or have dark black stools. Polycystic Kidney Disease: an inherited disorder in which cysts invade both kidneys. This causes enlargement in the size of the kidney while at the same time, reducing the amount of functional kidney tissue by compression. (For more information on this disorder choose “Polycystic Kidney Disease” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database). Splenomegaly: an enlarged spleen. Liver function tests are usually normal in people with CHF.

