Congenital Lactic Acidosis

overview:
Lactate is a chemical compound normally produced by all cells and plays important roles in several chemical processes in the body. Lactic acidosis occurs when lactate and other molecules, called protons, accumulate in bodily tissues and fluids faster than the body can remove them. Consequently, tissues and fluids may become acidic and impair the normal functioning of cells. Lactic acidosis can have many different causes and is often present in severely ill patients hospitalized in intensive care units.
Congenital lactic acidosis is a rare form of lactic acidosis. The word “congenital” means that the underlying condition that increases risk of developing lactic acidosis is present at birth. In most cases, the cause of congenital lactic acidosis is due to a defect in an enzyme responsible for helping the body convert carbohydrates and fats into energy. Most of these enzymes are located in specialized structures within the cell called mitochondria. Therefore, most causes of congenital lactic acidosis are due to genetic mitochondrial enzyme deficiencies. These are either inherited from one or both parents or arise spontaneously in the developing embryo.

symptoms:
The enzyme deficiencies that give rise to congenital lactic acidosis can potentially affect many different organ systems of the body and, therefore, lead to a wide variety of symptoms and signs. Whereas some individuals may have persistently elevated levels of lactic acid in blood, cerebrospinal fluid and urine, other people may have only occasional increases in lactic acid that are brought on by another illness, such as an infection, a seizure or an asthmatic attack.
In some children (especially those with a severe enzyme defect), clinical manifestations of congenital lactic acidosis appear within the first hours or days of life and may include loss of muscle tone (hypotonia), lethargy, vomiting and abnormally rapid breathing (tachypnea). Eventually, the condition may progress to cause developmental delay, intellectual disability, motor abnormalities, behavioral issues, abnormalities of the face and head and, ultimately, multi-organ failure. In some individuals in whom the disease is due to a mutation in mitochondrial DNA, the complications of congenital lactic acidosis may not appear until adolescence or adulthood.

