Congenital Type 1 Plasminogen Deficiency

overview:
Summary
Congenital type 1 plasminogen deficiency is a rare genetic disorder. Affected individuals develop thick growths, sometimes referred to as woody lesions or pseudomembranes, on the mucous membranes of the body. The mucous membranes are a moist layer of tissue that serves as a protective barrier that keeps these surfaces of the body from drying out. The mucous membranes most often affected in this disorder are those lining the inside of the eyelids and the front of the eye (called the conjunctiva) and the inside of the mouth. Other mucous membranes can be affected, including those lining the nose, middle ear, stomach and intestines (gastrointestinal tract), respiratory tract and the female genital tract. The disorder can also affect the kidneys and the brain.
The disorder is caused by variants in thePLGgene, which leads to a deficiency of the plasminogen enzyme.
Current treatment includes plasminogen replacement. Without treatment, the abnormal growths that form on these surfaces can cause significant complications and they usually recur if they are removed without replacement of plasminogen. The overall severity of the disorder can vary greatly from one person to another and depends on the location and duration of lesions.
Introduction
Congenital plasminogen deficiency can be classified into two subtypes, as described in the medical literature.
•	Congenital type 1 plasminogen deficiency, the condition discussed in this report, is characterized by reductions in both the level of immunoreactive and functional plasminogen.•	Congenital type 2 plasminogen deficiency, also called dysplasminogenemia, is characterized by a normal or near normal plasminogen immunoreactive plasminogen level with decreased activity. People with congenital plasminogen deficiency type 2 usually do not have any symptoms.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of type 1 plasminogen deficiency can vary from one person to another, even among members of the same family with the same genetic variants and enzyme levels. Oftentimes, initial signs are present in infants or young children. Symptoms may be persistent and lifelong, may wax and wane or be intermittent or may not appear until later in life. Some individuals appear to remain asymptomatic and may be diagnosed based upon testing of clinically apparent family members. Lesions may develop spontaneously or be ‘triggered’ by infection, trauma or injury and may be localized to one area of the body or affect multiple body systems.
The most common and well recognized symptom is ligneous conjunctivitis. Conjunctivitis refers to inflammation of the conjunctiva, the membrane that lines the eyes. Ligneous is a term that means ‘resembling wood’. People with ligneous conjunctivitis have growths or lesions on the conjunctiva that are yellow, white or red and have a texture that resembles wood. These growths most often appear on the inside of the eyelid and may be preceded by redness of the conjunctiva. Sometimes, the cornea (the thin, transparent membrane that covers the front of the eye) may become damaged by the lesions and cause scarring. Ultimately, a loss of vision can occur.
The second most common symptom is ligneous gingivitis, where ligneous growths appear on the gums and cause inflammation. They are usually not painful but can lead to a loss of tissue and ultimately of teeth.
Growths can also form in the mucous membranes of the middle ear, nose, throat, vocal cords, larynx, respiratory tract, gastrointestinal tract and the female genital tract. Growths in the middle ear can lead to what appears as chronic middle ear infection (otitis media) and hearing loss. Growths in the gastrointestinal tract may result in ulcers or what appears as an inflammatory bowel disease. Growths in the respiratory tract can lead to serious complications, including recurrent pneumonia and obstruction of the airways, which can be life-threatening, especially in small children. Growths can occur in the renal tubules of the kidney and lead to obstruction and poor kidney function. When growths occur in the female genital tract, they can lead to pain with menses, intercourse and infertility.
When growths affect the skin, the condition is called juvenile colloid milium and is characterized by small, translucent, yellow-brown bumps (papules). These growths usually occur on areas of the skin that are most exposed to the sun.
Some children with congenital type 1 plasminogen deficiency can develop a condition called occlusive hydrocephalus when lesions obstruct the flow of cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) in the central nervous system. This results in the accumulation of CSF in the skull because the fluid cannot drain properly. This causes pressure on the tissues of the brain.
Type 1 congenital plasminogen deficiency is life-long disorder that without adequate therapy can be associated with significant morbidity and disability and in some cases may be life threatening.
Older reports in medical literature speculated that affected individuals were at risk for the development of blood clots (thrombosis). However, this has not been confirmed and most evidence suggests that congenital type 1 plasminogen deficiency does not increase the risk of developing a blood clot.

