Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia

synonyms:
adrenogenital syndromeCAH

overview:
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a group of rare inherited autosomal recessive disorders characterized by a deficiency of one of the enzymes needed to make specific hormones. CAH affects the adrenal glands located at the top of each kidney. Normally, the adrenal glands are responsible for producing three different hormones: corticosteroids, which gauge the body’s response to illness or injury; mineralocorticoids, which regulate salt and water levels; and androgens, which are male sex hormones. An enzyme deficiency will make the body unable to produce one or more of these hormones, which in turn will result in the overproduction of another type of hormone precursor in order to compensate for the loss. The most common cause of CAH is the absence of the enzyme 21-hydroxylase. Different variants in the gene responsible for 21-hydroxylase result in different levels of the enzyme, producing a spectrum of effects. CAH due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency is responsible for 95% of all cases of CAH and is broken down further into two subcategories: classical CAH, which can be sub-divided into the salt-losing form or the simple-virilizing form, and non-classical CAH. Classical CAH is by far the more severe form and can result in adrenal crisis and death if not detected and treated. Non-classical CAH is milder and may or may not present symptoms. Since the absence of 21-hydroxylase makes these individuals unable to make the hormone cortisol and, in the case of salt-losing CAH, aldosterone, the body produces more androgens which cause a variety of symptoms such as atypical genital development in infant girls. There are other much rarer forms of CAH as well, including 11-Beta hydroxylase deficiency, 17a- hydroxylase deficiency, 3-Beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency, congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia and p450 oxidoreductase deficiency which all present different symptoms. Although CAH is not curable, patients can go on to lead normal lives if they receive adequate care and treatment.

symptoms:
Many individuals with CAH present with abnormally enlarged adrenal glands (hyperplastic adrenomegaly) that produce excessive amounts of androgens (male steroid hormones) leading to abnormal sexual development in females affected with the disease. Females with severe or classic virilizing CAH due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency will most likely have ambiguous or atypical external genitalia (masculinization or virilization), although they are genetically female and will have normal internal reproductive organs. Males with this type of CAH will not have ambiguous genitalia. Both genders can experience other symptoms such as early onset of puberty, fast body growth and premature completion of growth leading to short stature, if they are not diagnosed and treated in early life. About 75% of people with classical CAH due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency also have a deficiency of the hormone aldosterone, leading to the inability to retain salt and water (salt wasting). This results in excessive loss of water (dehydration), low circulating blood volume (hypovolemia) and abnormally low blood pressure (hypotension and shock). Without treatment, this severe form of CAH can lead to profound weakness, vomiting, diarrhea and circulatory collapse due to adrenal crisis. The remaining 25% are referred to as simple-virilizers and do not have a problem regulating salt and water levels. Fortunately, in the United States, and in many other developed countries, there is universal newborn screening for CAH due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency, and the vast majority of children are diagnosed and treated early to avoid these complications. The mild form of 21-hydroxylase deficiency (non-classical CAH) is not life-threatening and is due to a more common genetic variant. This mild form is not usually detected in our newborn screening programs, and it seldom requires early treatment. Symptoms in later childhood may include premature body hair or acne development. In adolescent females, the most common problems include excessive facial or body hair, menstrual irregularities, and pustular acne. Both genders have normal genitals. A small proportion of the non-classical CAH population has sub-fertility. Patients with CAH may or may not require treatment to improve their quality of life.
Rare forms of CAH:Patients affected with 11-Beta hydroxylase deficiency are protected from the symptoms associated with adrenal crisis, although they are subject to others such as hypertension due to salt retention and ambiguous genitalia in females. Steroid 17a-hydroxylase deficiency results in ambiguous external genitalia in males and lack of pubertal development or menstrual cycles (amenorrhea) in females. Steroid 3-Beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency leads to ambiguous genitalia in males and females. In both genders it can lead to salt-wasting.
Congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia may cause early death due to adrenal crisis. Males have ambiguous genitalia. Both males and females, if they survive, would likely be infertile. PORD (P450 oxidoreductase deficiency) presents with signs and symptoms that may resemble 21-hydroxylase deficiency, 17-hydroxylase deficiency, or a combination of the two enzyme deficiencies. Some cases have been associated with a skeletal disorder known as Antley-Bixler syndrome.

