Congenital Generalized Lipodystrophy

synonyms:
Berardinelli-Seip syndromeBerardinelli Seip congenital lipodystrophyBSCLCGLcongenital lipoatrophic diabetes

overview:
Summary

Congenital generalized lipodystrophy (CGL), also known as Berardinelli-Seip syndrome, is a rare genetic disorder characterized by the near total loss of body fat (adipose tissue) and extreme muscularity that is often present at birth or soon thereafter. CGL is associated with metabolic complications related to insulin resistance such as an inability to break down (metabolize) glucose intolerance (high blood glucose levels after oral glucose administration), elevated levels of triglycerides (fat) in the blood (hypertriglyceridemia), and diabetes. Diabetes associated with CGL is often very difficult to treat. Additional complications such as those affecting the liver and heart can also occur. The symptoms and severity of CGL can vary greatly from one person to another. There are four different subtypes of CGL each caused by changes (called variants or mutations) in different genes. All of the known types of CGL are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.

Introduction

Lipodystrophy is a general term for a group of disorders that are characterized by complete (generalized) or partial loss of adipose tissue. In addition to CGL, there are other inherited forms of lipodystrophy. Some forms of lipodystrophy are not inherited but acquired at some point during life (acquired lipodystrophy). The degree of severity and the specific areas of the body affected can vary among the lipodystrophies. The loss of adipose tissue that characterizes these disorders is sometimes referred to as lipoatrophy rather than lipodystrophy by some physicians. CGL was first described in the medical literature by Dr. Berardinelli in 1954 and reviewed by Dr. Seip in 1959.

symptoms:
Infants with all forms of CGL have a near total absence of body fat at birth or soon thereafter. They also have an extremely muscular appearance and may display prominent superficial veins. During early childhood, most children grow at an accelerated rate and have slightly enlarged hands, feet, and jaws (acromegaloid features). Infants and children have a markedly increased appetite and have been described as voracious eaters.
In individuals with CGL, fat deposits build up in areas of the body such as the muscles and liver. Consequently, affected individuals may develop abnormal enlargement of the muscles (muscular hypertrophy) or the liver (hepatomegaly). Some individuals may also have an abnormally enlarged spleen (splenomegaly). Hepatomegaly is often noticed during infancy. Fat accumulation in the liver (known as fatty liver or hepatic steatosis) may eventually cause scarring and damage to the liver (cirrhosis) and liver dysfunction. Ultimately, liver failure may develop in some patient, necessitating a liver transplant.
Individuals with CGL develop metabolic complications associated with insulin resistance. Some individuals with CGL have a condition called acanthosis nigricans, a skin condition characterized by abnormally increased coloration (hyperpigmentation) and “velvety” thickening (hyperkeratosis) of the skin, particularly of skin fold regions, such as of the neck, groin and armpits (axillae). Other complications of insulin resistance may occur at a young age (often between 15-20 years of age) including glucose intolerance, hypertriglyceridemia, and diabetes. These complications are often very difficult to control, and diabetes is often severe. Some individuals may experience extreme hypertriglyceridemia and chylomicronemia a condition characterized by the accumulation of chylomicrons (lipoprotein particles carrying fat) in the plasma. In some cases, this can result in episodes of acute inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis). Acute pancreatitis can be associated with abdominal pain, chills, jaundice, weakness, sweating, vomiting, and weight loss.
Intellectual disability can occur in CGL, especially in cases caused by mutations of theBSCL2gene (CGL type 2). However, the presence and/or severity of intellectual disability can vary dramatically from one person to another, even among members of the same family. Most cases have been associated with mild or moderate intellectual disability. Intellectual disability is not common in other forms of CGL.
After puberty, some women with CGL may develop polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). PCOS is characterized by an imbalance of female sex hormones. Affected women may also have too much androgen, a male hormone, in the body. PCOS can result in irregular menstrual periods or a lack of menstruation, oily skin that is prone to acne, multiple cysts on the ovaries, and mild hirsutism (a male pattern of hair growth). Hair may develop on the upper lip and chin. Most women with CGL are unable to conceive. However, in a few reported cases, affected women have had successful pregnancies. While some affected men may have normal reproductive capabilities, others may have morphological defects of sperms or reduced sperm count.
Heart irregularities may occur in some cases, especially abnormal thickening of the muscular walls of the left lower chamber of the heart (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy). This condition can obstruct the flow of blood in and out of the heart. Some individuals may have no associated symptoms; others may develop shortness of breath upon exertion, fatigue, and excessive sweating. As affected individuals age, they may experience chest pain or discomfort, irregular heartbeats, dizziness or fainting usually upon heavy exertion, and, eventually, life-threatening complications such as congestive heart failure. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is most common is individuals with CGL types 2 and 4. It often develops in individuals around the age of 30 but has been reported in infants as well.
Additional findings have been reported in individuals with CGL including excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis). Some findings are more likely to be associated with a specific subtype of CGL such as the formation of bone cysts after puberty (more common in types 1 and 2), which can cause individuals to be prone to spontaneous fractures; bone marrow fat loss (more common in types 1 and 2); and osteoporosis and problems with vitamin D, reported patients with CGL type 3. CGL type 3 patients may have swallowing difficulty due to large esophagus with reduced motility (achalasia). Muscular dystrophy, a general term for disorders that cause muscle weakness and loss of muscle tissue, and pyloric stenosis (constriction of the opening of stomach into duodenum) is seen in individuals with CGL type 4. Irregular heartbeats (cardiac arrhythmias) and sudden death have also been associated with CGL type 4.
Individuals with CGL type 1 lack metabolically active fat, which is the fat that plays a role in the storage and release of energy and is located in subcutaneous regions, intermuscular regions, the bone marrow and areas within the abdomen and chest (thoracic cavity), but mechanical fat is well preserved. Mechanical fat is the fat that supports and protects regions subjected to mechanical insults and is located in the palms, soles, eye sockets (orbits), scalp, and around the joints. Individuals with CGL type 2 are prone to having a more severe form of lipodystrophy because they also experience the loss of mechanical fat.

