Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation

synonyms:
CDGCDG syndromecarbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndromes

overview:
Summary
Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) is an umbrella term for a rapidly expanding group of over 130 rare genetic, metabolic disorders due to defects in a complex chemical process known as glycosylation. Glycosylation is the process by which sugar ‘trees’ (glycans) are created, altered and attached to 1000’s of proteins or fats (lipids). When these sugar molecules are attached to proteins, they form glycoproteins; when they are attached to lipids, they form glycolipids. Glycoproteins and glycolipids have numerous important functions in all tissues and organs. Glycosylation involves many different genes, encoding many different proteins such as enzymes. A deficiency or lack of one of these enzymes can lead to a variety of symptoms potentially affecting multiple organ systems. CDG can affect any part of the body and there is nearly always an important neurological component. CDG can be associated with a broad variety of symptoms and can vary in severity from mild to severe, disabling or life-threatening. CDG are usually apparent from infancy. Individual CDG are caused by changes (mutations) in a specific gene. Most CDG are inherited as autosomal recessive conditions, but some are X-linked or dominant. Others may arise spontaneously (de novo).
Introduction
CDG were first reported in the medical literature in 1980 by Dr. Jaak Jaeken and colleagues. More than 130 different forms of CDG have been identified in the ensuing years. Recently, Jaeken and colleagues proposed a classification system that names each type by the official abbreviation of the abnormal gene followed by a dash and CDG. For example, congenital disorder of glycosylation type 1a is now known as PMM2-CDG because a mutation in thePMM2gene causes this type of CDG. Major categories of CDG are based on the glycosylation pathway or molecule that is affected.  For instance, disorders of protein glycosylation are broken down into two groups known as disorders of N-glycosylation and disorders of O-glycosylation. Other types of CDG include disorders of glycosphingolipid and GPI-anchor glycosylation, and disorders of multiple glycosylation and other pathways. These four categories of CDG are described below.
Disorders of protein N-glycosylation
Most types of CDG are classified as disorders of N-glycosylation, which involve carbohydrates called N-linked oligosaccharides (glycans). Disorders of N-glycosylation are due to an enzyme deficiency or other malfunction somewhere along the N-glycosylation pathway. This category of CDG can be further divided into two subtypes: defects of oligosaccharide assembly and transfer (type 1) and defects in oligosaccharide trimming and processing that occur after they are bound to proteins (type 2). Disorders of protein N-glycosylation notably include PMM2-CDG, the most common type of CDG. (For more information on this disorder, choose “PMM2-CDG” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
Disorders of protein O-glycosylation
Disorders of O-glycosylation are due to an enzyme deficiency or other malfunction somewhere along the O-glycosylation pathway. Some of these disorders are better known than the N-linked forms and many have more traditional names. In some cases, they have also been classified as subtypes of other umbrella groups. For instance, some disorders of O-linked glycosylation are also classified as forms of muscular dystrophy. These disorders are collectively termed the dystroglycanopathies. The NORD database has individual reports on Walker-Warburg syndrome and Fukuyama muscular dystrophy, as well as general overviews on congenital muscular dystrophy and limb-girdle muscular dystrophy. For more information on these disorders, choose the specific disorder name as your search term in the Rare Disease Database. Other disorders involve defects in the synthesis of large molecules called glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) which are the sugar components of proteoglycans.
Disorders of glycosphingolipid and GPI-anchor glycosylation
As their name indicates, these disorders involve defects in the glycosylation of two types of lipid-containing molecules: glycosphingolipids (GSL) and glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors. These glycolipids have a wide range of functions in the body. Disorders associated with a defect in their production can therefore have a wide range of manifestations, as it is the case for disorders of protein glycosylation. There are over 20 types of GPI anchor disorders, but just a couple in GSL synthesis.
Defects of multiple glycosylation and other pathways
Some CDG occur due to defects that impact and alter multiple glycosylation pathways. For example, some individuals may have defects affecting both the N-linked and O-linked glycosylation pathways. These can also include defects in the organization, delivery, or trafficking of proteins within cells. These disorders usually have manifestations similar to other categories of congenital disorders of glycosylation.

symptoms:
CDG encompass a wide variety of disorders and symptoms. Their severity and prognosis vary greatly depending upon the specific type of CDG, even among individuals with the same type or from the same family. In addition, most types of CDG have only been reported in a handful of individuals, which makes it difficult for physicians to have an accurate picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. In most cases, these disorders become apparent in infancy. It is important to note that affected individuals will not always have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
Despite the wide variety in presentation, many types of CDG have a significant neurological component involving the brain and/or spine (central nervous system). Common neurological symptoms include diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), seizures, deficits in attaining developmental milestones (developmental disability), varying degrees of cognitive impairment and underdevelopment of the cerebellum (cerebellar hypoplasia) which can cause problems with balance and coordination. Additional common symptoms include abnormal fat distribution, defects in blood clotting that can cause abnormal bleeding or clotting (coagulation defects), gastrointestinal symptoms such as vomiting and diarrhea, eye abnormalities such as crossed eyes (strabismus) and retinal degeneration, and abnormal or distinctive facial features (facial dysmorphism). Although facial dysmorphism can occur in any type of CDG, it is most often associated with disorders of O-glycosylation. Feeding difficulties leading to failure to thrive are also common. Failure to thrive is defined as the failure to grow and gain weight as would be expected based upon age and gender. Another factor that can contribute to failure to thrive is excessive loss of proteins from the gastrointestinal tract (protein-losing enteropathy) which can also cause swelling due to fluid retention (edema). Fluid accumulation around the lungs or heart (pleural or pericardial effusions) has also been reported. Additional symptoms include various abnormalities of the kidneys, liver and heart; skeletal abnormalities including bony overgrowth or deformities; abnormalities of muscle fibers that can cause pain and weakness (myopathy); skin changes such as scaly skin or rashes; stroke-like episodes; and deficiencies of the immune system (immunodeficiency). As mentioned, the manifestations of CDG vary greatly between affected individuals. However, certain patterns of features are more frequently seen in certain types. For instance, patients with PGM1-CDG (a type 1 disorder of N-glycosylation) frequently have hypoglycemia, hormonal dysregulations, growth delay, seizures, cleft lip and/or palate, a uvula that is split in two (bifid uvula), myopathy and bleeding.

