Congenital Myopathy

synonyms:
CMBatten Turner congenital myopathy

overview:
Summary

Congenital myopathy (CM) is an extremely rare, inherited disease that affects the muscles (myopathy) and is characterized by the lack of muscle tone or floppiness at birth. There are several different subtypes of congenital myopathy and many are caused by changes (mutations) in specific genes. They differ in severity and onset of symptoms, cellular characteristics under a microscope, and prognosis. Symptoms can be present from birth or slowly progress throughout infancy and childhood, but this disorder does not typically get more severe in adulthood. Experimental treatments are still under development therefore CM disease management involves treatment of symptoms, prevention of possible life-threatening complications, and orthopedic, physical, occupational, speech or other forms of therapy.

symptoms:
The subtypes of CM have highly variable severity of muscle loss symptoms and differ in the age of onset.
General symptoms of congenital myopathy in a newborn are the slow, progressive loss of muscle tone characterized by floppiness (hypotonia) and general weakness. Early motor skills and other critical developmental milestones may be delayed. Toddlers with this disorder usually have mild muscle weakness and may be prone to falling or stumbling. The muscles of the pelvis, neck, and shoulder area are most commonly affected. Since the symptoms of this disease are not progressive during adulthood, most people with congenital myopathy walk normally as adults. However, some physical activities may be slightly impaired.
Typically, diagnosis of CM subtypes requires the use of muscle biopsy and looking at the structural make-up of the muscles under a microscope. Symptoms seen in one subtype are generally seen in other subtypes with slight exceptions and nuances.
Nemaline myopathy (NM) is also known as rod myopathy. NM is characterized by abnormal rod- or thread-like structures present in muscle fibers under a microscope. These abnormal rod structures are associated with problems in the contraction and tone of affected skeletal muscles, ultimately leading to muscle weakness.
There are six different types of NM which are based on age and severity: severe congenital, Amish, intermediate congenital, typical congenital, childhood-onset, and adult-onset. Severe cases of NM are typically seen in young children, while milder versions of NM are seen in adulthood. Muscle weakness is caused by decreased muscle tone in NM which generally occurs throughout the body and is most severe in the neck, face, and skin muscles. One symptom of NM includes bulbar muscle weakness indicated by difficulty speaking (dysarthria), difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), and excess saliva production (sialorrhea). In infants, bulbar muscle weakness is mainly presented as difficulty feeding while older children and adults exhibit difficulty swallowing. Other symptoms include foot deformities, curvature of the spine (scoliosis), as well as joint deformities (contractures). (For more information, search for “nemaline myopathy” in the Rare Disease Database.)
Core myopathies are characterized by areas in the muscle fiber that lack oxidative enzymatic activity. There are two types of muscle fiber core myopathy: central core disease (CCD) and multiminicore disease (MmD). CCD is characterized by the presence of single, well-circumscribed circular regions in the middle of type 1 fibers of the muscle that do not contain mitochondria. CCD is more common in infants who have hypotonia or seen in children with delays in motor development. CCD mainly affects the proximal and axial muscles. Orthopedic and joint deformities seen in nemaline myopathy are not seen in these patients. Eye muscles are not affected in this type of congenital myopathy. Pathologically, CCD can be observed in the tissue fibers by staining sections of the muscle fiber for oxidative enzyme activity. Patients with MmD also exhibit similar severity of symptoms compared to CCD with the exception of axial muscle weakness, especially in the head and neck muscle, which is much more severe in MmD. (For more information, search for “central core disease” in the Rare Disease Database.)
Centronuclear myopathy (CNM) is characterized by the abundant amount of centralized nuclei in muscle fibers when viewed in the microscope. One type of CNM, XLMTM, affects newborn boys and is generally clinical severe. Symptoms of XLMTM include an excess of amniotic fluid (polyhydramnios) and reduced fetal movements during pregnancy, thin ribs, weak eye muscles (ophthalmoplegia), drooping upper eyelid (ptosis), pyloric stenosis, knee, and hip contractures, and muscle wasting. Other forms of CNM can affect either males or females and tend to show more mild clinical signs. (For more information, search for “centronuclear myopathy” in the Rare Disease Database.)
Congenital fiber-type disproportion (CFTD) occurs when an abundant amount of type I (slow twitch) muscle fibers are 35-40% smaller than type II (fast twitch) muscle fibers. Many symptoms from the previous three myopathy types can be seen in CFTD as well. Additional symptoms include respiratory failure and nocturnal hypoventilation. (For more information, search for “CFTD” in the Rare Disease Database.)

