Congenital Fiber Type Disproportion

synonyms:
CFTDCFTDMcongenital myopathy with fiber-type disproportion

overview:
Summary
Congenital fiber type disproportion (CFTD) is a rare genetic muscle disease that is usually apparent at birth (congenital) or in early infancy. Major symptoms may include loss of muscle tone (hypotonia) and generalized muscle weakness. Delays in motor development are common and people with more marked muscle weakness may have abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis), dislocated hips and/or permanent fixation of certain joints in a flexed position (contractures), particularly at the ankle. The health problems tend to be static (i.e., non-progressive) in many but not all patients with CFTD.
A disease-modifying therapy for CFTD is not yet available, and treatment is focused on the specific symptoms in each individual.
Introduction
CFTD belongs to a group of muscle conditions called the congenital myopathies, genetic muscle disorders that are generally characterized by muscle weakness and low muscle tone typically present at birth or early childhood. Case reports describing children with the features of CFTD first appeared in the medical literature in the 1960s and 70s. The term congenital fiber type disproportion was first used in 1973.

symptoms:
The symptoms of CFTD are similar to other types of congenital myopathy and may vary from person to person. Onset of symptoms occurs at birth or in early infancy. The severity of symptoms is highly variable, ranging from mild deficits to severe weakness that may result in death in early childhood. In many patients with CFTD, the health problems are less severe than those of other classic congenital myopathies.
The mother may have noticed reduced fetal movements during pregnancy and there may have been excess amniotic fluid in the uterus (polyhydramnios).
Most individuals have loss of muscle tone (hypotonia) and non-progressive generalized muscle weakness that is present at or shortly after birth (congenital). Muscles closest to the trunk of the body (proximal muscles) such as those of the hip and shoulder area (limb-girdle) and muscles of the spine and neck (truncal muscles) are usually affected the most.
Other abnormalities that have been associated with CFTD include side to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis), dislocation of the hips, permanent fixation of certain joints in a flexed position (contractures), diminished reflexes and delays in attaining motor milestones. Some infants with CFTD may fail to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Infants with CFTD may have distinct facial features (myopathic facies) including a long, thin face, an abnormally high roof of the mouth (highly arched palate) and weak facial muscles. Additional facial characteristics include sunken cheeks and droopy eyelids (bilateral ptosis). Intelligence is usually normal in people with CFTD.
Other symptoms may include weak or hoarse voice, abnormalities of lung function, difficulty chewing (impaired mastication), underdevelopment of the jawbone (micrognathia), high-arched foot (pes cavus), inability to walk on heels (foot dorsiflexor weakness) and inward twisting of the foot (talipes equinovarus).
Some affected individuals may have a more severe form of CFTD characterized by severe weakness that may progress and cause serious complications including difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) and/or life-threatening respiratory muscle weakness. Paralysis of eye muscles (ophthalmoplegia) also occurs in some patients. Rarely, CFTD is associated with disease of the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy). Other rare cardiac symptoms related to CFTD include abnormal heart structures, right-sided heart failure resulting from chronically high blood pressure in the pulmonary arteries (cor pulmonale), and the appearance of a “caved-in” chest resulting from a chest wall structural abnormality (pectus excavatum).

