Congenital Contractural Arachnodactyly

synonyms:
CCABeals syndromeBeals-Hecht syndromearthrogryposis, distal, type 9

overview:
Congenital contractural arachnodactyly (CCA) is an extremely rare genetic disorder characterized by a Marfan-like body habitus (tall, slender), the permanent fixation of certain joints (e.g., fingers, elbows, knees, and hips) in a flexed position (contractures); abnormally long, slender fingers and toes (arachnodactyly); permanently flexed fingers (camptodactyly); and/or differently shaped ears resulting in a “crumpled” appearance. In addition, affected individuals may exhibit front-to-back and side-to-side curvature of the spine (kyphoscoliosis); feet that are differently positioned (talipes equinovarus or clubfoot); outward displacement of the fingers (ulnar deviation of the fingers); a short neck. Rarely, affected individuals may have a slight deformity of the valve on the left side of the heart (mitral valve prolapse). CCA is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.

symptoms:
CCA encompasses a broad range of symptoms. The specific symptoms that develop in each individual case and the severity of symptoms often vary. Most individuals have permanent fixation of certain joints in a flexed position (contractures) that is present a birth (congenital). The joints of the fingers, elbows, knees and hips are most often affected. In most cases, contractures improve with age.
Some affected infants have differently shaped ears giving them a “crumpled” appearance. Additional common symptoms include long, slender fingers and toes (arachnodactyly), permanently flexed fingers (camptodactyly), underdevelopment of certain muscles (muscular hypoplasia), and front-to-back and side-to-side curvature of the spine (kyphoscoliosis). Kyphoscoliosis is usually progressive and severe, often necessitating surgery.
Some children have a specific heart defect known as mitral valve prolapse (MVP). The mitral valve is located between the left upper and left lower chambers (left atrium and left ventricle) of the heart. MVP occurs when one or both flaps (cusps) of the mitral valve bulge or collapse backward (prolapse) into the left atrium during ventricular contraction (systole). In some cases, this may allow leakage or the backward flow of blood from the left ventricle back into the left atrium (mitral regurgitation). In some patients, no associated symptoms are apparent (asymptomatic). However, in other people, MVP can result in chest pain, abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias), fatigue, dizziness and/or other symptoms and signs.
Less common symptoms may occur in some children. Additional differences of the head and face (craniofacial) region include a small jaw (micrognathia), a prominent forehead (frontal bossing), a highly arched palate, a long narrow head (dolichocephaly or scaphocephaly), or a wide head (brachycephaly). Nearsightedness (myopia) affecting the eyes may also occur.
Some individuals may have a short neck. Some affected individuals have a clubbed foot, inwardly clasped (adducted thumbs) and bowed long bones of the arms and leg.
Rarely, individuals with CCA may develop a severe form of the disorder associated with life-threatening complications. This severe form of CCA is associated with various heart and intestinal abnormalities including atrial and ventricular septal defects; improper development of the aorta resulting in blockage of blood flow (interrupted aortic arch); a single umbilical artery; a condition in which the tube (esophagus) that normally carries food from the mouth to the stomach narrows to a thin cord or ends in a pouch rather than providing passage to the stomach (esophageal atresia); abnormal closure or blockage of the first part of the small intestine (duodenal atresia); and obstruction of the intestines due to malformation of part of the intestines (intestinal malrotation).
Rarer still, CCA may be associated with aortic root dilatation, a condition characterized by widening (dilatation) of the opening where the aorta and the heart chamber connect (aortic root).

