Congenital Erythropoietic Porphyria

synonyms:
CEPGunther diseaseuroporphyrinogen III synthase deficiencyUROS deficiency

overview:
Summary
Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP) is a very rare inherited metabolic disorder resulting from the deficient function of the enzyme uroporphyrinogen III synthase (UROS), the fourth enzyme in the heme biosynthetic pathway. Due to the impaired function of this enzyme, excessive amounts of certain porphyrins accumulate, particularly in the bone marrow, plasma, red blood cells, urine, teeth and bones. The major symptom of this disorder is hypersensitivity of the skin to sunlight and some types of artificial light, such as fluorescent lights (photosensitivity). After exposure to light, the photo-activated porphyrins in the skin cause bullae (blistering), the fluid-filled sacs rupture and the lesions often get infected. These infected lesions can lead to scarring, bone loss and deformities. The hands, arms and face are the most commonly affected areas. CEP is inherited as an autosomal recessive genetic disorder. Typically, there is no family history of the disease. Neither parent has symptoms of CEP, but each carries a gene variant that they can pass to their children. Affected offspring have two copies of the disease-causing gene variant, one inherited from each parent.

Introduction
CEP is one condition of a group of disorders known as the porphyrias. Each porphyria is characterized by abnormally high levels of porphyrin precursors or porphyrins in the body due to deficiency or overactivity of certain enzymes in the stepwise synthesis of heme, the essential component of hemoglobin and various hemoproteins. The porphyrias can be classified as cutaneous or acute, depending on their respective symptoms. There are eight major porphyrias. The symptoms associated with the various types of porphyria differ, depending upon the specific enzyme that is deficient or overactive. People who have one type of porphyria do not develop the other types, although very rarely, patients may have two different porphyrias.

symptoms:
The most common symptom of CEP is hypersensitivity of the skin to sunlight and some types of artificial light (photosensitivity), with blistering of the skin occurring after sun or light exposure. Affected areas of the skin may develop blisters (vesicles or bullae) which may become infected, scar and/or become discolored (hyperpigmentation) if exposure to sunlight is prolonged. These affected areas of skin may become abnormally thick. In addition, some affected individuals may also have loss of nails and end digits of the fingers due to infection of the underlying bone. Loss of facial features such as lips, parts of the ears and nose can also occur. The severity and degree of photosensitivity differ depending on the severity of the patient’s deficient enzyme activity which correlates with the individual gene variants. Photosensitivity often occurs from birth; however, in some people, it may not occur until childhood, adolescence or adulthood. Patients also often have brownish discolored teeth (erythrodontia) which fluoresces under ultraviolet light as well as increased hair growth (hypertrichosis).
In more severely affected patients, other symptoms can include a low level of red blood cells (anemia) and enlargement of the spleen. The anemia can be severe, and these patients require periodic blood transfusions to maintain sufficient numbers of red blood cells. In severely affected patients, anemia may be present in the fetus. Ocular problems also can occur including corneal scarring, eye inflammation and infections.
Symptoms usually start in infancy or childhood and the diagnosis in most patients is suggested by the reddish color of the urine which stains the diapers.

