Congenital Afibrinogenemia

overview:
SummaryCongenital afibrinogenemia is a rare bleeding disorder characterized by absence of fibrinogen (also known as coagulation factor I) in the blood, a protein that is essential in the blood clotting (coagulation) process. Affected individuals may be susceptible to severe bleeding (hemorrhaging) episodes, particularly during infancy and childhood. Bleeding can occur anywhere in the body, including the skin, nose, oral cavity, gastrointestinal tract, liver, genital and urinary tract, joints, muscles and central nervous system. Bleeding can also happen in the skull (intracranial hemorrhage) and is a leading cause of death and disability in individuals with congenital afibrinogenemia.
Women are at increased risk for vaginal bleeding and increased blood loss during menstruation and tend to have recurrent miscarriages. Other manifestations of the disease include risk of spontaneous spleen rupture, formation of painful bone cysts, poor wound healing and increased risk of formation of unstable clots that can lodge in blood vessels and occlude them (thromboembolic complications).
Symptoms usually begin to show at birth with umbilical cord bleeding but can manifest later in life. Individuals with this disease can be treated with fibrinogen replacement therapy, which might require frequent injections and monitoring of blood fibrinogen levels. Treatment can be preventive (prophylaxis) or can be administered when the individual has episodes of bleeding (symptomatic treatment). Congenital afibrinogenemia is genetic disease that follows an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern.
IntroductionCongenital afibrinogenemia is a hereditary fibrinogen abnormality, a rare category of bleeding disorder that can affect the quantity or quality of fibrinogen, a blood coagulation factor. Afibrinogenemia and hypofibrinogenemia respectively refer to the absence and reduced levels of fibrinogen in the blood.
Dysfibrinogenemia and hypodysfibrinogenemia are fibrinogen abnormalities where the blood levels of fibrinogen are normal (in dysfibrinogenemia) or reduced (in hypodysfibrinogenemia), but the coagulation factor is modified in a way that it does not function normally or optimally. When symptomatic, hereditary fibrinogen abnormalities have similar symptoms. Congenital afibrinogenemia patients are more likely to have symptoms and to experience severe bleeding episodes. Diagnosis can often be made at birth because most affected infants have severe umbilical cord bleeding. Early diagnosis of congenital afibrinogenemia and early treatment can prevent severe bleeding episodes, particularly bleeding inside the skull (intracranial hemorrhage), which can lead to disability and death.

symptoms:
The absence of fibrinogen in the circulating blood of individuals with congenital afibrinogenemia makes them unable to effectively coagulate their blood, leading to prolonged bleeding. Bleeding episodes can be spontaneous or due to minor trauma and can happen anywhere in the body, including the skin, nose, oral cavity, gastrointestinal tract, liver, genital and urinary tract and central nervous system. Symptoms begin to show at birth with umbilical cord bleeding in around 85% of individuals. Bleeding might also be noticed in the stools or vomit of newborns.
Intracranial hemorrhage is a leading cause of death and disability in affected individuals. Signs of intracranial hemorrhage include vomiting, dizziness, headache, confusion and seizures. Patients can suffer from long term problems such as psychomotor impairment after an episode of bleeding inside the skull.
Joint bleeding (hemarthrosis) might cause pain and limit movement. Severe cases of joint bleeding might require total joint replacement (arthroplasty). Pain and movement limitation can also happen from accumulation of blood (hematoma) in muscles. Some patients also experience bleeding in the bones (interosseous hemorrhage) after minimal trauma. Formation of bone cysts containing blood can happen, particularly in long bones, and cause bone pain.
Women are at increased risk for vaginal bleeding and increased blood loss during menstruation (menometrorrhagia) and tend to have recurrent miscarriages. Women who receive treatment might be able to give birth but might suffer from prolonged bleeding after delivering (postpartum hemorrhage).
Other symptoms related to congenital afibrinogenemia include an increased risk of spontaneous rupture of the spleen, poor wound healing, and formation of unstable clots that can lodge in blood vessels and occlude them (embolus). Even without fibrinogen in their blood, affected individuals can form clots via the action of other coagulation factors, namely von Willebrand factor and thrombin. However, these clots are loose and tend to disseminate in the body. They can then occlude the blood vessels in the lungs (pulmonary embolism), brain (ischemic stroke) or heart (coronary embolism) and cause severe consequences, including death.

