Congenital Athymia

overview:
Summary
Congenital athymia is a rare disease characterized by the absence of a functioning thymus. It can occur as an isolated findingleading toimmunodeficiencyor it can be part of a genetic syndrome.
Most infants with congenital athymia have chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome or CHARGE syndrome. Both disorders have symptoms affecting multiple body systems. NORD has separate reports on 22q11.2 deletion syndrome and CHARGE syndrome in theRare Disease Database.
Congenital athymia can also result from changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in genes that impact thymic organ development such asFOXN1andPAX1or from variants in genes that are involved in development of the entire midline region of the body, such asTBX1,CHD7andFOXI3.
In addition, infants exposed to retinoic acid during pregnancy and infants born to diabetic mothers have a higher risk for congenital athymia.
People affected with congenital athymia have profound immunodeficiency, increased susceptibility to infections, and frequently, autologous graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) which is a life-threatening complication that can occur after certain stem cell or bone marrow transplants, a medical treatment that replaces the bone marrow with healthy cells.
Introduction
The thymus is a gland located on top of the heart. The thymus produces specialized white blood cells called T cells that fight infections, especially viral infections. The T cell count is highest in infants in the first two years of life and then slowly decreases over time. In adults over the age of 60, the thymus is mostly replaced by fat. Children without a thymus are extremely deficient in T cells and very susceptible to infections. Affected babies have chronic or recurrent infections including candidiasis, skin, pulmonary and urinary tract infections, chronic diarrhea and have difficulty growing and gaining weight (failure to thrive).
Without treatment, some affected children may not survive. Thymus transplantation may be a cure for this condition.

symptoms:
Absence or underdevelopment of the thymus results in an increased susceptibility to viral, fungal and bacterial infections (immunodeficiency). The degree of susceptibility can vary. Specific symptoms vary depending upon the type of infection, overall health of the infant and other factors. Respiratory infections are common, often leading to respiratory distress. Opportunistic infections are also common. The term “opportunistic infection” refers either to infections caused by microorganisms that usually do not cause disease in individuals with a fully functioning immune system or to widespread (systemic) overwhelming disease by microorganisms that typically cause only localized, mild infections. Not only are affected infants more susceptible to infections, but their bodies also cannot effectively fight off the infections.
Congenitalathymiacan be isolatedwithout other associated problems(very rarely)butleading to immunodeficiency,or can be a part of several conditionsand, therefore,the specific signs and symptoms depend on the specific diagnosis.
T-cell immunodeficiency with thymic aplasia(Nezelofsyndrome)may includethe following features:
Aplasia of the thymus in all patientsCellular immunodeficiency, which refers to the lack of cellular immune response, an immune response that does not involve antibodies but is mediated with the activation of T-lymphocytes and other cells when the body needs to defend itself against a virus, bacteria or fungusDecrease in T cell count and proliferationSevere T-cell immunodeficiencyRecurrent infectionsDifficulty growing and gaining weight (failure to thrive)Opportunistic infectionsPneumoniaRecurrent bacterial infectionsRecurrent infection of the gastrointestinal tractSevere infectionSevere viral infectionDiarrheaFungal infections
T-cell immunodeficiency, congenital alopecia and nail changes(also known as nude SCID, FOXN1 deficiency,alymphoidcystic thymic dysgenesis and Winged helix deficiency)isis aconditioncharacterizedby congenitalathymia(resulting in severe T-cell immunodeficiency),along withcongenitalcomplete hair lossand fingernails or toenails that are deformed,thickenedor discolored (dystrophic nails). The symptoms begin during the first months of life with severe, recurrent, life-threatening infections and low or absent circulating T cells. The signs and symptoms may include:
Thymic aplasiaT-cell immunodeficiency (low or absent T cells) with increased susceptibility to viral, fungal and opportunistic infections as well as live vaccinesFailure to thrivePoor growthComplete hair loss (alopecia)No eyelashesNo eyebrowsOral candidiasisRecurrent respiratory infectionsGastroenteritis with diarrheaRedness and scaling of the skin (erythroderma)Fingernails or toenails that are deformed, thickened or discolored (dystrophic nails)Depressions or dimples in the fingernails or toenails (nail pitting).
Although B-cells are typically present in normal numbers, antibody production is compromised in the absence of T-cells, which makes the patients susceptible to infections with encapsulated bacteria such asStreptococcus pneumoniae, Klebsiella, Haemophilus influenzae, Neisseria meningitidisandPseudomonas aeruginosa.
Congenital athymia can also be found in several syndromes such as:
Complete DiGeorge syndrome also known as complete DiGeorge anomaly22q11.2 deletion syndromeCHARGE syndrome
Most infants with congenital athymia have a chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome or CHARGE syndrome.  It is now recognized that 22q11.2 deletion syndrome includes DiGeorge syndrome and other conditions. However, the term DiGeorge syndrome is still used for people who have clinical features of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome but do not have an identified 22q11.2 deletion. In addition, many but not all infants with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome and CHARGE syndrome have T cell counts less than the 10th percentile for age and are often referred to as having DiGeorge syndrome.
Complete DiGeorge syndrome is characterized by absence or underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the thymus resulting in very low T cell counts. Absence or underdevelopment of the thymus results in an increased susceptibility to viral, fungal and bacterial infections (immunodeficiency).
Additional signs and symptoms include:
Heart defects that are present at birth (congenital heart disease)Hypoparathyroidism, a rare condition in which the parathyroid glands, that are in the neck, fail to produce enough parathyroid hormone, which plays a role in regulating the levels of calcium and phosphorus in the bloodLow levels of calcium in the blood can result in seizuresSoftening of the tissues of the voice box (larynx), a condition called laryngomalacia that can cause noisy breathing and eating difficulties
Chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome is associated with a range of problems including:
Heart defects that are present at birth (congenital heart disease)Palate abnormalitiesImmune system dysfunction including autoimmune diseaseLow calcium (hypocalcemia)Other endocrine abnormalities such as thyroid problems and growth hormone deficiencyGastrointestinal problemsFeeding difficultiesKidney abnormalitiesHearing lossSeizuresSkeletal abnormalitiesMinor facial differencesLearning and behavioral differences
CHARGE is an acronym that stands for:
[C]olobomacongenital [H]eart defectschoanal [A]tresiagrowth [R]etardation[G]enital hypoplasia[E]ar anomalies or deafness.
Congenital athymia can also be found in people who have changes (disease-causing variants) in the following genes:
TBX1gene which cause DiGeorge syndromeTBX2gene which cause vertebral anomalies and variable endocrine and T-cell dysfunction, a syndrome characterized by skeletal malformations primarily involve the vertebrae, and endocrine abnormalities involving parathyroid hormone, growth hormone, and the thyroid gland have been reported as well as T-cell abnormalities and thymus gland aplasia or hypoplasiaPAX1gene which cause otofaciocervical syndrome-2 with T-cell deficiency (OTFCS2), a rare disorder characterized by facial anomalies, cup-shaped low-set ears, preauricular fistulas, hearing loss, branchial defects, skeletal anomalies including vertebral defects, low-set clavicles, winged scapulae, sloping shoulders and mild intellectual disability, as well as athymia or an underdeveloped thymus with T-cell immunodeficiency and recurrent, sometimes fatal, infections
Infants exposed to retinoic acid during pregnancy have a higher risk for congenital athymia. Infants born to diabetic mothers have a higher risk for congenital athymia. Infants with congenital athymia who are born to diabetic mothers may also have only one kidney (renal agenesis).
Researchers have also identified an atypical form of congenital athymia. Affected infants, in addition to immunodeficiency, develop a red, often itchy, rash and enlargement of the lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy).

