Congenital Muscular Dystrophy

synonyms:
CMD

overview:
Summary
Congenital muscular dystrophy (CMD) is a general term for a group of genetic muscle diseases that occur at birth (congenital) or early during infancy. CMDs are generally characterized by diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), which is sometimes referred to as “floppy baby”; progressive muscle weakness and degeneration (atrophy); abnormally fixed joints that occur when thickening and shortening of tissue such as muscle fibers cause deformity and restrict the movement of an affected area (contractures); spinal rigidity, and delays in reaching motor milestones such as sitting or standing unassisted. Feeding difficulties and breathing (respiratory) complications can develop in some cases. Muscle weakness may improve, remain stable or worsen. Some forms of CMD may be associated with structural brain defects and, potentially, intellectual disability. The severity, specific symptoms, and progression of these disorders vary greatly. Most forms of CMD are inherited as autosomal recessive traits. Collage type VI-related disorders can be inherited as either autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive conditions. LMNA-related CMD is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, with all mutations reported to date being new mutations (de novo).
Introduction
CMDs belong to a larger group of disorders known as the muscular dystrophies. The muscular dystrophies characterized by weakness and degeneration of various voluntary muscles of the body. More than 30 different disorders make up the muscular dystrophies. The disorders affect different muscles and have different ages of onset, severity and inheritance patterns. As researchers have learned more about the CMDs, such as identifying many of the specific genes involved, a broader picture of these diseases has emerged. The subtypes of CMD have considerable overlap with other disease classifications including the congenital myopathies, disorders of glycosylation, and the limb-girdle muscular dystrophies. CMDs are a rapidly growing disease family and information about these disorders is constantly changing.

symptoms:
The onset, specific symptoms, and severity of CMD varies considerably even among affected members of the same family. Several different methods of classifying the CMDs have been proposed. One classification separates these disorders based upon the primary genetic defect. This classification has three main categories: CMDs caused by defective genes that produce structural proteins of the basement membrane or the extracellular matrix, a complex structure that surrounds and supports cells; CMDs caused by defective genes that produce proteins essential for the normal attachment or binding (glycosylation) of sugar molecules to dystroglycan, a protein found on the membrane (sarcolemma) of muscle cells; or CMDs caused by a defective selenoprotein 1 (SEPN1) gene, which produces a protein without a currently known function. Recently, defective genes that produce proteins of the nuclear envelope, the double-layered membrane that covers the nucleus of certain cells, have also been linked to CMD.
CMDS RESULTING FROM DEFECTIVE STRUCTURAL PROTEINS OF THE BASAL MEMBRANE OR EXTRACELLUAR MATRIX OF MUSCLE FIBERS.
* Congenital Muscular Dystrophy Type 1A (MDC1A; Merosin-Deficient CMD; CMD with Laminin Alpha 2 Deficiency)
This form of CMD may be associated with a complete deficiency of the protein merosin in muscle, a protein found in the tissue that surrounds muscle fibers. Infants usually exhibit diminished muscle tone (hypotonia) and muscle weakness at birth. Some infants may experience respiratory and feeding difficulties shortly after birth (neonatal period). Feeding difficulties may result in affected children failing to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Muscle weakness is severe and most affected infants experience delays in reaching or fail to reach many motor milestones. Most affected infants can sit unsupported and some can stand without assistance. Only a few children with the severe form of MDC1A eventually are able to walk without assistance.
Additional symptoms may occur including joint contractures, congenital dislocation of the hip, progressive curvature of the spine (scoliosis), and weakness of muscles around the eyes that gradually restricts the movements of the eyes (ophthalmoplegia). Some individuals with MDC1A experience seizures. As affected children age, breathing difficulties may progress and cause complications such as inadequate breathing at night (nocturnal hypoventilation). Seizures have been reported in approximately 20%-30% of affected individuals.
Although less common, some affected children only have a partial deficiency of merosin. The severity of partial merosin deficiency varies greatly and can be much milder. Muscle weakness may be absent. The age of onset may be during infancy, adolescence, or adulthood. During infancy, affected individuals may have diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), contractures, and delays in attaining motor milestones. Although rare, partial deficiency of merosin can resemble classic MDC1A, onset of symptoms usually doesn’t occur until the second decade and feeding or ventilation support is usually not required or not required until much later in life. Adolescence or adult onset usually resembles a similar muscle disorder known as limb-girdle muscular dystrophy. (For more information on this disorder, see the related disorders section of this report.)
* Collagen Type VI-Related Disorders
Collagen type VI-related disorders is a spectrum of disease encompasses two disorders formerly thought to be separate conditions, Bethlem myopathy and Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy. Bethlem myopathy represents the mild end of this spectrum; Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy represents the severe end this spectrum. Intermediate forms are common. (For more information, see the individual NORD entry on “collagen type VI-related disorders” in NORD’s Rare Disease Database.)
The characteristic symptoms of this form of CMD are diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), muscle weakness, abnormal front-to-back and side-to-side curvature of the spine (kyphoscoliosis), and abnormally flexible (hyperelastic) joints of the wrists and ankles as well as in the fingers and toes. Contractures may be present at birth or occur later. Additional symptoms may be present and severity is highly variable. In some cases, congenital dislocation of the hip, muscles spasms of the neck (torticollis), or lower bone density may develop. Affected individuals may also experience breathing (respiratory) difficulties and failure to thrive.
Intelligence is normal in most cases. The amount of motor development varies from case to case. Some children are able to walk independently; others require assistance to walk. In some cases, affected children may never be able to walk. In addition, some children who develop the ability to walk independently lose that ability because of the progression of the disease and worsening of the contractures. Others maintain the ability to walk through adulthood.
Additional symptoms may occur including breathing insufficiency and a skin condition characterized by thickening and hardening (hyperkeratosis) of hair follicles, resulting in the development of rough, elevated growths (papules) on the skin. However, skin on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet is velvety and very soft.
Individuals with this form of CMD develop rigidity of the spin, often with scoliosis.
* Congenital Muscular Dystrophy with Integrin 7 Alpha Deficiency
This is an extremely rare form of CMD that has been described in only a few individuals. Symptoms include muscles weakness and delays in attaining motor milestones.
* Congenital Muscular Dystrophy with Integrin 9 Alpha Deficiency
This extremely rare form of CMD has only been described in a handful of individuals. Affected individuals may experience hypotonia, contractures, joint hyperlaxity, and scoliosis. In this form of CMD, intelligence has been unaffected and individuals retain the ability to walk into adulthood. Some affected individuals may develop decreased respiratory function, but usually do not require ventilator support.
CMDS THAT RESULT FROM DEFECTIVE PROTEINS THAT ARE ESSENTIAL FOR THE BINDING OF SUGAR MOLECULES TO DYSTROGLYCAN, KNOWN COLLECTIVELY AS THE DYSTROGLYCANOPATHIES.
Several different genes have been associated with the dystroglycanopathies and researchers have determined that these individual genes can potentially be associated with more than one of the disorders described below. Although these disorders were once considered separate conditions, this subgroup of CMD is now considered a spectrum of disease that ranges from mild presentations (phenotypes) to severe ones. Mutations in certain genes that cause these dystroglycanopathies can also causes mild forms of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy.
* Congenital Muscular Dystrophy Type 1C (MDC1C; CMD with secondary merosin deficiency type 2)
MDC1C is a potentially severe form of CMD that is characterized by diminished muscle tone (hypotonia) and muscle weakness at birth. Affected infants may also develop respiratory and feeding difficulties. Respiratory difficulties are progressive and often cause breathing insufficiency (respiratory failure). Delays in reaching motor milestones also occur. Affected infants usually are able to sit up without assistance, but only a few are able to walk unassisted.
Additional symptoms may occur including overgrowth (hypertrophy) of the muscles of the legs, an abnormally enlarged tongue (macroglossia), weakness and wasting (atrophy) of the muscles of the arms, and contractures, especially of the Achilles tendon, hip flexor, and fingers. Weakness and wasting may also affect the muscles of the face and shoulders. Some individuals eventually develop disease of the heart muscle, specifically dilated cardiomyopathy. This condition is characterized by abnormal enlargement or widening (dilatation) of one or more of the chambers of the heart resulting in weakening of the heart’s pumping action, causing a limited ability to circulate blood to the lungs and the rest of the body and resulting in fluid buildup in the heart, lung, and various body tissues (congestive heart failure).
Most cases of MDC1C are not associated with structural brain abnormalities and intelligence is normal. However, in some rare cases, affected individuals do have such abnormalities and often have mild intellectual disability. Seizures have also been reported in some cases.
* Muscle-Eye-Brain (MEB) Disease Spectrum
The symptoms and severity of MEB disease may vary. Affected infants usually exhibit profoundly diminished muscle tone (hypotonia) and muscle weakness at birth. Muscle weakness often affects the arms, legs, and trunk. Affected infants may fail to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Developmental delays and eye (ocular) abnormalities are also common findings. In mild forms of MEB, affected individuals experience delays in attaining developmental milestones, but eventually may be able to walk independently. In severe cases, few motor milestones are attained (e.g., no head control or ability to hold the head up). MEB is usually progressive and some individuals will lose previously acquired skills such as walking independently. Motor decline can also occur as a result of increasing spasticity.
Affected infants may have a large head with a prominent forehead and wide “soft spot” (fontanelle) and distinctive facial features including an abnormally small jaw (micrognathia), underdevelopment of middle portion of the face (midface hypoplasia), a short nose, and an abnormally small groove between the upper lip and tip of the nose (philtrum). Ocular abnormalities associated MEB disease include increased pressure within the eyes (infantile glaucoma), clouding of the lenses of the eyes (cataracts), rapid, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus), underdevelopment of the nerve-rich membrane lining the eyes (retinal hypoplasia), and severe nearsightedness (congenital myopia).
Central nervous system involvement such as increased reflexes or involuntary muscle spasms (spasticity) that result in slow, stiff movements of the legs may also develop. Mental retardation and seizures may also occur in individuals with MEB disease. All individuals with MEB have a small brainstem and cerebellum and some have cerebral cortex abnormalities such as pachygyria or lissencephaly, a structural brain defect in which the brain is smooth, lacking the normal folds.
* Fukuyama Type Congenital Muscular Dystrophy and Walker-Warburg Syndrome
Like MEB disease, Fukuyama congenital muscular dystrophy (FCMD) and Walker-Warburg syndrome (WSS) are multisystem disorders characterized by muscle weakness, structural brain defects, and eye abnormalities.
Infants with FCMD have generalized muscle weakness, diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), poor sucking ability, and a weak cry. Contractures of the hip, knee, ankles, and elbows are common findings within the first year of life. Individuals with FCMD also have eye (ocular) abnormalities such as crossed eyes (strabismus), cataracts, nearsightedness (myopia), abnormal eye movements, and, in severe cases, retinal detachment and abnormally small eyes (microphthalmos). FCMD is also characterized by seizures, mental retardation, and speech problems. Eventually, affected individuals develop respiratory difficulties and disease of the heart muscle (dilated cardiomyopathy).
Walker-Warburg syndrome is characterized by muscle weakness, type II lissencephaly, and the abnormal development of the nerve-rich membrane at the back of the eyes (retinal dysplasia). Affected individuals also have obstructive hydrocephalus, a condition in which blockage of the normal circulation of cerebrospinal fluid results in pressure on the brain. Occipital encephalocele can also occur. Affected infants also typically have severe growth failure; an unusually small head; seizures; and additional abnormalities of the eyes including detachment of the retinas, abnormally small eyes (microphthalmia), and clouding of the lenses (cataracts) and the corneas.
(For more information, see the individual entries for FCMD and WSS in NORD’s Rare Disease Database.)
* Congenital Muscular Dystrophy Type 1D (MDC1D)
As of 2012, MDC1D has been reported in several individuals from four different families (kindreds). Affected individuals have developed severe intellectual disability, hypotonia, developmental delays, mild contractures, and muscle weakness and degeneration (atrophy). Structural defects of the brain have also been reported.
CMDS RESULTING FROM DEFECTS OF THE SELENOPROTEIN1 (SEPN1) GENE.
* SEPN1-Related Myopathy
Individuals with this form of CMD were initially referred to as having rigid spine muscular dystrophy (RSMD1) or CMD with early rigidity of the spine. However, individuals with a rigid spine and a mutation of the selenoprotein N1 (SEPN1) gene have been seen who fit the criteria for four different muscle conditions including rigid spine muscular dystrophy (rigid spine syndrome), congenital fiber type disproportion, desmin-related myopathy, and multiminicore myopathy. Researchers now refer to these individuals collectively as having SEPN1-related myopathy.
The hallmark of this form of CMD is early rigidity of the spine that often develops during the first year of life and slowly progressive curvature of the spine (scoliosis), which develops from 3 to 12 years of age. Additional symptoms include progressive muscle weakness, diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), early breathing (respiratory) difficulties, contractures of the Achilles tendons, and weakness of the neck muscles resulting in poor head control. Muscle weakness is mild compared to other forms of CMD.
Breathing difficulties are progressive and by the teen-age years, muscles within the lungs may become affected. Eventually, affected individuals experience inadequate breathing at night (nocturnal hypoventilation) and, potentially, respiratory failure. The onset of breathing difficulties is highly variable, usually occurring during adolescence, but also occurring during infancy and as late as the fourth decade of life.
Individuals with SEPN1-related myopathy usually do not experience delays in attaining motor milestones. Most individuals are able to walk independently although because of progressive spinal rigidity and scoliosis they may experience difficulties walking later during life.
CMDS RESULTING FROM DEFECTIVE PROTEINS OF THE NUCLEAR ENVELOPE.
* LMNA-Related CMD
This form of CMD is often associated with a severe presentation that occurs during the first 6 months of life. Affected infants may experience hypotonia, absence of head/trunk support (dropped head syndrome), spinal rigidity, and generalized muscle wasting and weakness that is prominent in the neck, arms and feet. Scoliosis and lower limb contractures may also develop. As muscle weakness progresses, lung disease can develop resulting in breathing difficulties. Severely affected individuals may require breathing assistance (mechanical ventilation).
This form of CMD is caused by mutations of the LMNA gene. Mutations of this gene have also been shown to cause a wide variety of other disorders (allelic disorders) including familial partial lipodystrophy type 2 (Dunnigan lipodystrophy), mandibuloacral dysplasia, a couple forms of Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, a form of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, a form of hereditary spastic paraplegia, a form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, a form of dilated cardiomyopathy, Malouf syndrome, and some cases of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. Individuals whose symptoms overlap among these disorders have been reported in the medical literature. (For more information on these disorders, choose the specific disorder name as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
* SYNE1-Related CMD
This extremely rare form of CMD has only been reported in two siblings who had adducted thumbs, intellectual disability, cataracts, and ophthalmoplegia. These siblings also had underdevelopment of the cerebellum (cerebellar hypoplasia), which can cause problems with balance and coordination. This form of the CMD is caused by mutations of the SYNE1 gene.
ADDITIONAL RARE FORMS OF CMDS WITH OR WITHOUT A KNOWN GENETIC DEFECT.
Several additional forms of CMD exist, but cannot be linked to a specific genetic defect. These forms include cases of WSS not linked to mutations in any known gene associated with glycosyltransferase enzymes and cases with rigid spine syndrome not linked to mutations in the SEPN1 gene. Cases associated with cerebellar involvement have also been reported.
* Congenital Muscular Dystrophy Type 1B (MDC1B; CMD with secondary merosin deficiency type 1)
MDC1B is characterized by diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), muscle weakness of the muscles closer to the center of the body (proximal muscles), generalized overgrowth of some muscles (hypertrophy), rigidity of the spine, and contractures especially of the Achilles tendon. This form of CMD has been linked to an as yet unidentified gene on chromosome 1 and is classified as a subtype of the dystroglycanopathies.
* CHKB-Related Muscle Disease
This extremely rare form of CMD has been reported in fewer than twenty individuals. Affected individuals experience intellectual disability, hypotonia, and generalized muscle weakness. Affected individuals were able to walk without assistance. Additional symptoms that may occur include dilated cardiomyopathy and structural abnormalities to the mitochondria, the parts of the cell that release energy. This disorder is also known as megaconial type CMD or CMD with mitochondrial structural abnormalities (CMDmt).

