Conradi Hünermann Syndrome

synonyms:
CDPXD2CDPX2X-linked dominant chondrodysplasia punctata 2Conradi-Hunermann-Happle syndromeHapple syndromechondrodysplasia punctata type 2

overview:
Summary
Conradi-Hünermann syndrome is a rare genetic disorder that affects approximately 1:100,000 to 1:200,000 births. This syndrome typically presents with skeletal abnormalities, short stature, differences in the form of the skull bones (craniofacial), eye or vision differences, and skin, hair, and nail abnormalities. The specific symptoms and severity of the disorder may vary greatly in individuals with Conradi-Hünermann syndrome. Symptoms may manifest anytime between early life to adulthood. Conradi-Hünermann syndrome is classified as a form of chondrodysplasia punctata, a group of disorders characterized by the formation of small, hardened spots of calcium on the “growing portion” or heads of the long bones (stippled epiphyses), the bones of the spine (vertebrae), the windpipe (trachea) and parts of the ribs. Skeletal findings in Conradi-Hünermann syndrome present as asymmetric shortening of long bones, particularly those of the upper arms (humeri), thighs (femora) and of the hands and feet. Individuals with Conradi-Hünermann syndrome may also have abnormalities in the curvature of the spine as well as growth deficiency that can cause short stature. Individuals with Conradi-Hünermann syndrome can have differences in the way the skull bones are formed, and this can be seen as a face or head that is asymmetric, prominent forehead, flattened midfacial regions (midfacial hypoplasia) and a low nasal bridge. Eye findings in Conradi-Hünermann syndrome can include cataracts at birth or early in life, abnormally small eyeballs (microphthalmia), small corneas (microcornea) and loss of transparency of the lenses of the eyes (cataracts). Many individuals with Conradi-Hünermann syndrome also present with sparse, coarse scalp hair, flattened and split nail plates and/or abnormal thickening, dryness, and scaling of the skin. Conradi-Hünermann syndrome is inherited as an X-linked dominant manner; this means that the disorder primarily affects females and can lead to fetal death in males.  Treatment is dependent on the individual’s symptoms and no cure exists for Conradi-Hünermann syndrome.
Introduction
Conradi-Hünermann syndrome is named after Dr. Conradi and Dr. Hünermann, who described this condition in medical literature in 1931. In the 1970’s, Dr. Happle contributed additional information about the signs and symptoms, inheritance and causes of this syndrome which is why this condition is also referred to as Conradi-Hünermann-Happle syndrome.

symptoms:
The symptoms, progression and severity of Conradi-Hünermann syndrome can vary dramatically, even among members of the same family. The disorder can cause serious complications at birth or be so mild that individuals may not be identified until adulthood (usually after having a child with Conradi-Hünermann syndrome). It is important to note that individuals with Conradi-Hünermann syndrome may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Individuals with Conradi-Hünermann syndrome should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis. The classic symptoms of Conradi-Hünermann syndrome involve the skeleton, skin and eyes. Intelligence is usually unaffected.
Growth
Infants with Conradi-Hünermann syndrome may fail to grow and gain weight at the rate expected for their age and sex (failure to thrive). Growth deficiencies may ultimately result in a final adult height that is below normal (short stature). Some infants with Conradi-Hünermann syndrome are susceptible to recurrent infections.
Skeletal Findings
Infants with Conradi-Hünermann syndrome have small, hardened spots of calcium on the “growing portion” or heads of the long bones (stippled epiphyses) as well as other areas of the cartilaginous skeleton. Cartilage is a tough, elastic type of connective tissue that provides cushion and structure within the body. When the skeleton begins to develop, it mostly consists of cartilage, which is gradually replaced by bone. The development of these abnormal calcified spots is also known as chondrodysplasia punctata. In infants with Conradi-Hünermann syndrome, punctate calcifications may develop throughout the spinal column, pelvis, front ends of the ribs (costal cartilages), breastbone, shoulder blades, collarbones, and, in rare cases, the voice-box (larynx) and windpipe (trachea). Chondrodysplasia punctata tends to resolve on its own within the first few years of life.
Individuals with Conradi-Hünermann syndrome typically have additional skeletal abnormalities. This commonly includes asymmetric shortening of long bones of the limbs, particularly those of the upper arms (humeri) and the thigh bones (femora). This causes a disproportionate length of the arms and legs with one side typically more impacted than the other. Individuals with Conradi-Hünermann syndrome also frequently have abnormal sideways and front-to-back curvature of the spine (scoliosis or kyphoscoliosis). Abnormal stiffness of the joints or joints that are fixed or locked in a bent position (flexion contractures) may also occur. In some patients, other skeletal abnormalities have also been reported including malformation of the hips (hip dysplasia), defects of the spinal column and deformities in which the feet are abnormally twisted out of shape or position (clubbed feet).
Eye findings
Some individuals with Conradi-Hünermann syndrome have clouding of the lenses of the eye (cataracts). Cataracts may be present at birth (congenital) or may develop during infancy. Cataracts may affect one or both eyes and can cause blurred vision or decreased clarity of vision. Rarely, additional eye (ocular) abnormalities include abnormally small eyes (microphthalmos), abnormally small corneas (microcornea), down-slanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures), rapid, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus) and degeneration of the main nerve that transmits nerve impulses from the retina to the brain (optic atrophy). In some patients, eye abnormalities can significantly reduce vision.
Facial features
Individuals with Conradi-Hünermann syndrome can have distinctive facial features which include an unusually prominent forehead (frontal bossing), flattened cheekbones (malar hypoplasia), a flattened bridge of the nose, upturned nostrils (anteverted nares) and malformed (dysplastic) ears. Hearing loss has been reported in some patients.
Skin findings
In the newborn period, many infants with Conradi-Hünermann syndrome can have redness (erythema) and unusual thickening, dryness and scaling of the skin (ichthyosiform erythroderma) distributed in a linear, blotchy pattern over the body. Although the eruption usually resolves during infancy, older children may subsequently develop inflammation and wasting (atrophy) of follicles (follicular atrophoderma), causing pores to appear unusually large. In some patients, areas of the skin may be darker or lighter than surrounding areas (hyper- and hypopigmentation). Patchy areas of hair loss and scarring may develop on the scalp (cicatricial alopecia). The sparse scalp hair may also be unusually coarse and lusterless.
Other features reported in individuals with Conradi-Hünermann include abnormal calcifications and potential narrowing (stenosis) of the windpipe (trachea) and/or the larynx, which connects the throat and the trachea; an unusually short neck; abnormalities of the nails such as flattened or split nails; and/or other physical findings.
Typically, individuals with Conradi-Hünermann syndrome have a life expectancy similar to that of the general population unless they have severe spine problems (scoliosis) that affect lung and heart function. The intelligence of individuals with Conradi-Hünermann syndrome is usually not affected.

