COPA Syndrome

overview:
Summary

COPA syndrome is a rare, genetic autoimmune disorder that can affect multiple systems of the body, especially the lungs, kidneys, and joints. Symptoms usually appear in childhood during the first or second decade of life. The signs and symptoms, and the severity of the disorder can be very different in one person when compared to another. This is true even for members of the same family. COPA syndrome is an immune-mediated disorder, which means that the characteristic inflammation results from abnormal functioning (dysregulation) of the immune system and the presence of specific autoantibodies. The disorder is caused by variations (mutations) in theCOPAgene and occurs spontaneously as a new variation, or is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.
COPA syndrome has been described as having features of both autoimmune disorders and autoinflammatory disorders. An autoimmune disorder is one in which the body’s adaptive immune system, which protects the body from infectious or other foreign substances, mistakenly attacks healthy tissue instead. Autoinflammatory syndromes are a group of disorders characterized by recurrent episodes of inflammation due to an abnormality of the innate immune system.

symptoms:
Although researchers have been able to establish a clear syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about the disorder is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified patients, the lack of large clinical studies, and the possibility of other genes or factors (e.g. environmental factors) influencing the disorder prevent physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Individuals and parents should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
Lung disease associated with COPA syndrome can be classified as interstitial lung disease (ILD), which is a general term for disorders that cause progressive scarring of the lungs. Lung disease may occur before the development of joint disease. General symptoms associated with lung disease include a chronic or persistent cough, shortness of breath, and abnormal, rapid breathing (tachypnea). Affected individuals may also develop inflammation of the air passages of the lungs (bronchitis) and lung cysts. Chronic wheezing and chest pain can also occur. There can be a slow, gradual decline in lung function.
About half of individuals with COPA syndrome experience bleeding from the alveoli (alveolar hemorrhaging). The lungs contain millions of tiny air sacs called alveoli. When a person breathes in air, oxygen travels to the lungs and into the alveoli. It passes through the walls of the alveoli into tiny blood vessels called capillaries and then into the bloodstream to be carried throughout the body. Alveolar hemorrhaging is a severe complication that can cause coughing up of blood (hemoptysis) and low levels of circulating red blood cells (anemia). Anemia can cause fatigue, lightheadedness, pale skin color, dizziness, rapid heartbeat, and shortness of breath. Alveolar hemorrhaging is a potentially life-threatening complication that can lead to blood through the lungs (diffuse pulmonary infiltrates) and a rapid inability to breathe (acute respiratory failure).
Many affected individuals will develop inflammation of the joints (arthritis). Affected joints have included large joints such as the shoulders and knees, and smaller joints like those found in the fingers. Affected individuals experience pain, swelling, and stiffness of the affected joints. Joint pain can potentially be severe and debilitating. Symptoms may be worse upon waking. Children can also experience severe arthritis. Arthritis can sometimes develop before symptoms of lung disease.
Affected individuals may also develop inflammation of the kidneys (nephritis). Progressive damage to the kidneys can lead to blood in the urine (hematuria), abnormal levels of protein in the urine (proteinuria), and decreased urine output. Eventually, swelling due to fluid accumulation (edema) and reduced kidney function develop. Some individuals develop scarring (fibrosis) of the kidneys.
Other conditions have been reported to occur in a few individuals with COPA syndrome include inflammation of the spinal cord and optic nerve (neuromyelitis optica) and the degeneration of the bone near where the long bone of the leg meets the hip (avascular necrosis). However, it is not known whether these are potential complications of the disorder, or coincidental findings.

