Cor Triatriatum

synonyms:
Cor Triatriatum SinistrumTriatrial Heart

overview:
Cor triatriatum is an extremely rare congenital (present at birth) heart defect. Normally, the human heart has four chambers of which two are the atria. These two are separated from each other by a partition (septum) called the atrial septum. The other two chambers, known as ventricles, are also separated by a septum. In cor triatriatum there is a small extra chamber above the left atrium of the heart. The pulmonary veins, returning blood from the lungs, drain into this extra “third atrium.” The passage of blood from the lungs into the heart (left atrium and ventricle) is slowed by this extra chamber. Cor triatriatum may eventually lead to features of congestive heart failure and obstruction over time.

symptoms:
The symptoms of cor triatriatum vary greatly, depending on the size of the opening between the extra chamber and the left atrium.  If the opening is small, symptoms usually develop early in infancy and probably will include abnormally rapid breathing (tachypnea), wheezing, coughing, and/or abnormal accumulation of fluid in the lungs (pulmonary congestion).  Progressive enlargement of the heart (cardiomegaly) occurs and often results in congestive heart failure along with abnormally high pressure within the artery that leads to the heart from the lungs (pulmonary artery).  Some newborns with cor triatriatum may also have abnormal heart sounds or heart murmurs.
In older people (after childhood), the symptoms of cor triatriatum may include abnormal swelling of areas of the body (generalized edema), pain and discomfort while breathing (dyspnea), an abnormally rapid heartbeat (tachycardia), and the excessive accumulation of fluid in the lungs (pulmonary congestion).  Acute inflammation of the lungs (pneumonia) and bronchial tubes (bronchitis) may occur frequently and may lead to congestive heart failure.  Individuals with cor triatriatum are also at increased risk for bacterial infection of the delicate membranes surrounding the heart (endocarditis).

