Corticobasal Degeneration

synonyms:
CBDCBGDcortical basal ganglionic degenerationcortical basal ganglionic degeneration

overview:
Summary

Corticobasal degeneration (CBD) is a rare progressive neurological disorder characterized by cell loss and deterioration of specific areas of the brain. Affected individuals often experience movement disorders initially in one limb that might spread to both the arms and legs. Symptoms include muscle rigidity and the inability to perform purposeful or voluntary movements (apraxia). Affected individuals may have sufficient muscle power for manual tasks but struggle to direct their movements appropriately. Although CBD was historically described as a motor disease, it is now recognized that cognitive and behavioral symptoms are also associated with CBD and often come before the motor symptoms. Initial signs typically appear in people ages 60-70, and may include language difficulties, poor coordination and issues with memory. The exact cause of CBD is unknown; however, it may be linked to the accumulation of the tau protein in the brain.

symptoms:
Because signs and symptoms associated with CBD are frequently caused by other neurodegenerative disorders, researchers use the term “corticobasal syndrome” to indicate the clinical diagnosis. “Corticobasal degeneration” is diagnosed after a patient dies and an autopsy reveals the necessary criteria of brain pathway abnormalities specific to CBD. This is an important distinction because less than half (35-50%) of patients presenting with symptoms of of corticobasal syndrome during life have CBD at autopsy.
The symptoms, progression, severity and presentation of CBD can vary greatly from one person to another. It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Patients should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
In many patients, the first sign of CBD is trouble with movement of the limbs. The muscles of affected individuals may stiffen or shake, primarily in the limbs (progressive extrapyramidal muscle rigidity). Individuals are often unable to make voluntary, purposeful movements with the affected limb (apraxia). Affected individuals have sufficient muscle power for manual tasks but have difficulty directing their movements appropriately. Difficulties with the affected limb can worsen over time. People with CBD may first become aware of the disorder when they have difficulty coordinating movements in the performance of manual tasks such as buttoning a shirt, combing their hair or gesturing with their hands. Affected individuals often describe their actions as stiff, clumsy or uncoordinated. Some patients may be unaware of the movement or unable to control the movement of a limb (alien limb syndrome). Some individuals may experience a loss of discriminative sensation in one or two areas of the body. Symptoms typically begin on one side of the body (unilateral) but usually progress over time to affect both sides and all four limbs. Arms are usually affected before the legs, but in rare cases, legs may show symptoms first.
Additional symptoms of CBD may include shaking while in particular positions (postural tremor) or while performing a task (action tremor) and/or exaggerated slowness of movements (bradykinesia) or lack of movement (akinesia). The combination of movement abnormalities including limb rigidity, rest tremor and bradykinesia/akinesia. is known as parkinsonism. Sudden, brief involuntary muscle spasms causing jerky movements (myoclonus) may also occur. In some patients, involuntary muscle contractions can force certain part(s) of the body into abnormal, sometimes painful movements and positions (dystonia). Affected individuals often experience focal dystonia, where only one area such as the leg, neck or arm, has involuntary muscle spasms. Affected individuals may also develop contractures, a condition in which a joint becomes permanently fixed in a bent (flexed) or straightened (extended) position, completely or partially restricting the movement of the affected joint. Oftentimes balance is affected as well (postural instability). For example, affected individuals may have trouble resuming walking when slightly unstabilized.
CBD may also cause speech and language abnormalities including difficulties understanding or expressing language (aphasia), difficulty saying what they want to say despite knowing the right words (apraxia of speech) and speech difficulties due to problems with the muscles that enable speech (dysarthria). Additional symptoms that may occur include difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), an inability to control eyelid blinking and/or an uncoordinated walk (ataxic gait). Eventually, affected individuals may be unable to walk without assistance.
Individuals with CBD can develop a more global loss of intellectual abilities (dementia), usually later in the course of the disease. Affected individuals may also exhibit memory loss, impulsiveness, disinhibition, apathy, irritability, reduced attention span and obsessive-compulsive behaviors. In some patients, the signs and symptoms of dementia may even precede the development of motor symptoms. Initial cognitive symptoms include a non-fluent, progressive aphasia and impairments in executive function.
For many years, CBD was thought to be a neurological condition primarily associated with movement disorders. In recent years, researchers have noted that cognitive and behavioral abnormalities occur more frequently than initially believed. As CBD progresses, affected individuals may become unable to communicate effectively. Eventually, affected individuals may become bedridden and susceptible to life-threatening complications such as pneumonia, bacterial infections, blood infection (sepsis) or blockage of one or more of the main arteries of the lungs, usually due to blood clots (pulmonary embolism).

