Costello Syndrome

synonyms:
faciocutaneoskeletal syndromeFCS syndrome

overview:
Costello syndrome is an extremely rare disorder that affects multiple organ systems of the body. This condition is characterized by growth delays after birth; short stature; extra loose skin on the neck, palms of the hands, fingers, and soles of the feet; noncancerous tumors (papillomata) around the face and anus; developmental delay and intellectual disability; and a characteristic facial appearance. Other physical features may include the development of dry hardened skin on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet (palmoplantar hyperkeratosis), abnormally deep creases on the palms and soles, and/or abnormally flexible joints of the fingers (hyperextensible). There is an increased incidence of congenital abnormalities of the heart and thickening of the heart muscle called a cardiomyopathy. Characteristic craniofacial features may include an abnormally large head (macrocephaly); coarse facial features; unusually thick lips; and/or abnormally wide nostrils (nares). Affected individuals have an increased lifetime risk to develop specific malignant tumors. Costello syndrome is an autosomal dominant genetic condition caused by mutations in theHRASgene.

symptoms:
Infants with Costello syndrome typically have a normal or high birth weight, but show poor sucking ability, have swallowing difficulties, and fail to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Growth delay after birth typically results in short stature during childhood and adulthood. Affected children may have developmental delay or mild to moderate intellectual disability. In some individuals, speech development and/or the ability to walk is significantly delayed. Children with Costello syndrome generally have warm, sociable personalities.
Individuals with Costello syndrome typically have loose skin (cutis laxa) on the neck, palms, fingers, and soles. The skin in these areas may lack elasticity and hang loosely; in addition, the skin may appear wrinkled and thickened. In some cases, certain areas of the skin may become unusually dark (hyperpigmentation). In addition, most patients with this disorder develop dry hardened patches of skin (hyperkeratosis) with unusually deep creases on the palms and soles. Some affected individuals may also have skeletal abnormalities such as dislocated hips, abnormally flexible (hyperextensible) joints of the fingers, wrists bent toward the little finger (ulnar deviation) and/or unusual tightening of the fibrous cords on the back of the heels (Achilles tendon). Additional skeletal abnormalities include side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis), front-to-back curvature of the spine (kyphosis), and reduced range of motion in the shoulder and elbows.
Children with Costello syndrome usually devlelop papillomata around the mouth and nostrils. Papillomata may develop as early as two years of age or at older ages. In some cases, these wart-like (verrucal) lesions may be found near the anus. Papillomata usually become more apparent with age. Other benign tumors have also been reported.
Children with Costello syndrome have a distinctive facial appearance. Characteristic facial features may include an abnormally large head (macrocephaly); low-set ears with large, thick lobes; unusually thick lips; a large, depressed nasal bridge; abnormally wide nostrils (nares); and a coarse facial appearance. In addition, affected children may have unusually curly hair and/or sparse, thin hair on the front (anterior) of the head. Some children have folds of skin over the inner corners of the eyes (epicanthal folds).
In early childhood relative overgrowth of the hindbrain compared to the space available in the posterior fossa of skull cavity can result in crowding and neurologic problems. Because severe crowding requires surgical intervention, screening with brain and cervical spine MRI has been suggested.
Eye and vision changes are common and include nystagmus (rapid eye movements) in younger individuals, strabismus and rarely in older individuals keratoconus (abnormal thickening of the cornea).
Children with Costello syndrome often have certain heart abnormalities. These may include structural malformations of the heart that are present at birth (congenital heart defects); abnormal thickening of the muscular walls of the left lower chamber of the heart (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy); leakage of the valve between the left upper (atrial) and lower (ventricular) heart chambers (mitral valve prolapse); and/or other cardiac defects. Associated symptoms and findings may include abnormal heart sounds (heart murmurs) that may be detected by a physician through use of a stethoscope; shortness of breath, particularly upon exertion; faintness; chest pain; abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias); and/or other findings that may potentially lead to life-threatening complications without appropriate treatment.
Affected individuals have an approximately 15% lifetime risk to develop malignant tumors such as a cancer of the muscle tissue (rhabdomyosarcoma), a cancer of the nerve cells (neuroblastoma), and transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder.
In some cases, the symptoms and findings of Costello syndrome overlap with two similar disorders known as Noonan syndrome and cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome which are caused by mutations in different genes. (For more information on Noonan and cardiofaciocutaneous syndromes, see the Related Disorders section below.)

