Craniometaphyseal Dysplasia

synonyms:
CMDJackson type CMDosteochondrodysplasia

overview:
Summary
Craniometaphyseal dysplasia (CMD) is a rare disorder that involves the way the bones in the head, arms, and legs grow. The skull is made up of about 20 bones that grow and get larger as people grow. For persons with CMD, the bones of the skull grow too much and push into each other. When these bones push against each other, the pressure causes the symptoms of CMD. The bones of the head can also be unusually hard (sclerosis). CMD can cause mild changes in the shape of the face and head. MCD can also cause more serious symptoms such as hearing loss and blindness. Because of this, it is important that individuals with CMD see medical professionals that are knowledgeable about CMD and can watch for these symptoms.
CMD also causes the long bones in the legs and arms to be shaped differently. Persons with CMD can have unique facial features. Intelligence and quality of life are usually normal. CMD is often first noticed within the first few weeks of life and the symptoms are life-long. CMD is genetic and can be seen in multiple family members.

symptoms:
CMD is often first noticed within the first few weeks of life. The early symptoms of CMD are difficulty eating and breathing.
Persons with CMD have unique facial features. These can include widely-spaced eyes (hypertelorism), wide portion of the nose between the eyes (wide nasal bridge), and large lower jaw (mandible). The increased pressure caused by facial bone growth can cause the eyes to stick out further (proptosis). The head can also be unusually long in shape (dolichocephaly).
Hardening and increased growth of the bone that holds the teeth can cause teeth to come in late or not at all.
CMD can cause the air passages in the nose to be small. This can make it difficult for mucus to pass through, causing swelling in the nose and sinuses. This swelling can cause difficulty breathing.
Persons with CMD can develop different-shaped long bones in the arms and legs. These bones can be broad in the middle or “club-shaped” (metaphyseal dysplasia). The different-shaped bones are best seen on an x-ray and may not be noticeable by looking at a person.
If the pressure on the face and head is not reduced, some of the more severe symptoms of CMD can develop. The inability to move the muscles of the face can be caused by pressure on the nerves that connect to these muscles (cranial nerves). Hearing loss or deafness can be caused by pressure on the nerves that connect to the ears (sensorineural hearing loss) or pressure on the inside of the ear (conductive hearing loss). Blindness can be caused by pressure on the nerves that connect to the eye. Not all persons with CMD will have these features and they can often be prevented with surgery.
Individuals with CMD who do not have major complications can have a normal lifespan and a good quality of life.

