Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease

synonyms:
CJDJakob-Creutzfeldt DiseaseJakob's Diseasesubacute spongiform encephalopathy

overview:
Summary
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is an extremely rare, degenerative brain disorder. It affects about one in every million people per year worldwide. People with CJD typically develop symptoms later in life and may show changes in behavior, memory troubles, lack of coordination and vision problems. As the disease progresses, there may be rapidly progressive deterioration of mental functioning, memory (dementia) and muscle control. CJD is a fatal disease. In most affected individuals, life-threatening complications develop less than a year after they start showing symptoms.
There are three major subtypes of CJD. In 85-90 percent of patients, CJD randomly appears even though the person has no known risk factors such as family history or environmental exposure (sporadic CJD). In about 10-15 percent of patients, there may be a family history of CJD (genetic CJD). In less than 1 percent of patients, the disease can be caused by exposure to infected brain or nervous system tissue through medical treatment (iatrogenic) or ingestion (orally) (acquired CJD). A subset of acquired CJD called variant CJD (vCJD) or, commonly, “mad cow disease” first appeared in the United Kingdom and is caused by eating beef infected with bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE). This vCJD occurs in younger people (median age of onset is 28 years).
All types of CJD are due to the presence of a disease-causing protein called a prion. Disease-causing prions can disrupt the structure of the brain and lead to degeneration. Currently, there are no treatments that can cure or stop the progression of CJD. Treatment is supportive and aimed at making the person as comfortable as possible.
Introduction
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) was named by two German doctors named Hans Creutzfeldt and Alfons Jakob who studied the disease in the 1920s. Over time, scientists noted the similarities of human CJD to animal diseases (called bovine spongiform encephalopathy or “mad cow disease” in cows and scrapie in sheep) and learned that human and animal forms are caused by a similar mechanism; an abnormal, infectious protein called a prion. The term prion, derived from proteinaceous infectious particle, was coined by Stanley Prusiner. In humans, there are three subtypes of CJD based on how the abnormal prion protein occurred: sporadic (sCJD), genetic (gCJD) and acquired (aCJD).

symptoms:
All types of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) are extremely rare degenerative brain disorders (i.e., spongiform encephalopathies), characterized by the sudden onset of cognitive impairments and neuromuscular symptoms. Specific signs and symptoms of each type are outlined below.
Sporadic CJD and genetic CJD
In sporadic CJD (sCJD) and genetic CJD (gCJD), symptoms typically arise between ages 40-60 years.  Initially, these symptoms may look like subtle signs of confusion, depression, forgetfulness, sleeping difficulties (insomnia) and/or behavioral changes. Affected individuals may also experience impaired vision, abnormal physical sensations and/or difficulties with voluntary movement coordination.
Individuals may then experience rapidly progressive loss of intellectual abilities, demonstrating impaired memory and judgment and distinct personality changes (dementia). Neuromuscular abnormalities become more apparent at this stage of the disorder and may include muscle weakness and loss of muscle mass (wasting); muscular rigidity; tremors; repeated, involuntary, shock-like muscle spasms (myoclonus) and/or slow, continual, involuntary writhing movements, particularly of the arms and legs (athetosis); increasingly impaired coordination of voluntary movements; and/or difficulty with speech (dysarthria) due to impaired muscular control. Vision may also become increasingly impaired.
In individuals with sCJD and gCJD, neurological and neuromuscular impairment continues to progress and later stages of the disorder may be characterized by loss of physical and intellectual functions, coma and increased susceptibility to repeated infections of the respiratory tract (e.g., pneumonia). In many patients, life-threatening complications tend to develop less than a year after the disorder becomes apparent.
Acquired CJD
Acquired CJD (aCJD) and a specific variant form of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD) occur very rarely (<1 percent of all CJD; less than 500 cases ever known). Symptoms are similar to other forms of CJD, however, there are three key differences. First, acquired forms of CJD typically occur in young adults (i.e., teens and 20s) rather than in the 40s-50s as in sCJD and gCJD. Second, patients tend to have a slightly longer clinical course. Third, acquired forms usually begin with more significant psychiatric symptoms. Delusions are also sometimes reported. Some people with the disorder may have abnormal sensations (dysesthesia) or pain in the face, arms, and legs. 

Within a few weeks or months, individuals with aCJD or vCJD experience the onset of progressive neuromuscular symptoms including an impaired ability to coordinate voluntary movement (cerebellar ataxia); severely diminished muscle tone (hypotonia); and slow, halting speech. In some patients, neuromuscular abnormalities may include irregular, rapid, involuntary jerky movements (chorea). As the disease advances, individuals with aCJD or vCJD demonstrate increasing memory impairment that progresses to dementia. During later stages of the disorder, affected individuals may experience repeated, involuntary, shock-like muscle spasms (myoclonus). In individuals with aCJD or vCJD, life-threatening complications tend to develop approximately 13 to 14 months after initial symptoms occur.

