Crigler Najjar Syndrome

synonyms:
familial nonhemolytic unconjugated hyperbilirubinemiahereditary unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia

overview:
Summary
Crigler-Najjar syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by an inability to properly convert and clear bilirubin from the body. Bilirubin is an orange-yellow bile pigment that is mainly a byproduct of the natural breakdown (degeneration) of old or worn out red blood cells (hemolysis). Normally, bilirubin created in this process is converted from an unconjugated form to a form that can be dissolved in water and excreted from the body (called conjugated bilirubin). Affected individuals cannot convert unconjugated bilirubin to the conjugated form because they lack a specific liver enzyme required to break down (metabolize) bilirubin. Since they cannot convert bilirubin, they develop abnormally high levels of unconjugated bilirubin in the blood (hyperbilirubinemia).
The hallmark finding of Crigler-Najjar syndrome is a persistent yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes and whites of the eyes (jaundice). There are two forms of this disorder: Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I, characterized by a nearly complete lack of enzyme activity and severe, even life-threatening symptoms; and Crigler-Najjar syndrome type II, characterized by partial enzyme activity and milder symptoms. Both forms are inherited as autosomal recessive traits and are caused by errors or disruptions (mutations) of theUGT1A1gene.
Introduction
Crigler-Najjar syndrome was first recognized in six infants of three couples who were blood relatives (consanguineous). These cases were reported in the medical literature in 1952 by Drs. Crigler and Najjar. In 1962, Dr. Arias reported a milder version of this disorder, which is now termed Crigler-Najjar syndrome type II.

symptoms:
The symptoms of Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I become apparent shortly after birth. Affected infants develop severe, persistent yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes and whites of the eyes (jaundice). These symptoms persist after the first three weeks of life.
Infants are at risk for developing kernicterus, also known as bilirubin encephalopathy, within the first month of life. Kernicterus is a potentially life-threatening neurological condition in which toxic levels of bilirubin accumulate in the brain, causing damage to the central nervous system. Early signs of kernicterus may include lack of energy (lethargy), vomiting, fever, and/or unsatisfactory feedings. Other symptoms that may follow include absence of certain reflexes (Moro reflex); mild to severe muscle spasms, including spasms in which the head and heels are bent or arched backward and the body bows forward (opisthotonus); and/or uncontrolled involuntary muscle movements (spasticity). In addition, affected infants may suck or nurse weakly, develop a high-pitched cry, and/or exhibit diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), resulting in abnormal “floppiness.”
Kernicterus can result in milder symptoms such as clumsiness, difficulty with fine motor skills and underdevelopment of the enamel of teeth, or it can result in severe complications such as hearing loss, problems with sensory perception, convulsions, and slow, continuous, involuntary, writhing movements (athetosis) of the arms and legs or the entire body. An episode of kernicterus can ultimately result in life-threatening brain damage.
Although kernicterus usually develops early during infancy, in some cases, individuals with Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I may not develop kernicterus until later during childhood or in early adulthood. Patients in whom the blood bilirubin concentration is maintained at safe levels by exposure to light (see below under treatment) can develop kernicterus at any age if the light treatment is interrupted or the patient is affected by other illnesses.
Crigler-Najjar syndrome type II is a milder disorder than type I. Affected infants develop jaundice, which increases during times when an infant is sick (concurrent illness), has not eaten for an extended period of time (prolonged fasting) or is under general anesthesia. Some people have not been diagnosed until they are adults. Kernicterus is rare in Crigler-Najjar syndrome type II, but can occur especially when an affected individual is sick, not eating or under anesthesia.

