Crouzon Syndrome

synonyms:
craniofacial dysostosiscraniostenosis, Crouzon typeCrouzon craniofacial dysostosis

overview:
Summary
Crouzon syndrome is a rare genetic disorder. It is a form of craniosynostosis, a condition in which there is premature fusion of the fibrous joints (sutures) between certain bones of the skull. The sutures allow an infant’s head to grow and expand. Eventually, these bones fuse together to form the skull. In Crouzon syndrome, the sutures fuse prematurely affecting the proper growth of the skull and head and potentially altering the shape and development of the skull. Certain bones in the face may be affected as well. The severity of craniosynostosis can be different in one infant when compared to another. Symptoms primarily include differences of the face and head. Intelligence is usually not affected. Crouzon syndrome is caused by changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in one of theFGFRgenes, usuallyFGFR2, and is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.

symptoms:
Crouzon syndrome, also known as craniofacial dysostosis, is primarily characterized by premature closure of the fibrous joints (cranial sutures) between certain bones in the skull (craniosynostosis) and distinctive facial features. Cranial and facial malformations may vary, ranging from mild to potentially severe, including among members of the same family (kindred).
For example, the degree of cranial malformation is variable and depends on the specific cranial sutures involved as well as the order and rate of progression. In most affected individuals, there is premature fusion of the sutures (i.e., coronal and sagittal sutures) between bones forming the forehead (frontal bone) and the upper sides of the skull (parietal bones). In addition, the suture between the back and the sides of the skull (i.e., lambdoidal suture) or other sutures may be involved in some people. In most individuals with Crouzon syndrome, early sutural fusion causes the head to appear unusually short and broad (brachycephaly). In other patients, the head may appear long and narrow (scaphocephaly) or triangular (trigonocephaly). Rarely, premature closure of multiple sutures (known as Kleeblattschadel type craniosynostosis) causes the skull to be divided into three lobes (cloverleaf skull deformity). In children with Crouzon syndrome, craniosynostosis typically begins during the first year of life and progresses until approximately age two to three. However, craniosynostosis may sometimes be apparent at birth or, more rarely, may not be noted during early childhood.In most individuals, there is unusual shallowness of the orbits or the bony cavities of the skull that accommodate the eyeballs. As a result, the eyeballs appear to protrude or bulge forward (proptosis). Affected individuals are unusually susceptible to developing inflammation of the front, transparent regions of the eyes (i.e., exposure keratitis) as well as the membranes that line the inner surfaces of the eyelids and cover the whites of the eyes (exposure conjunctivitis). This effect is most apparent before 2 years of life. Crouzon syndrome is also often associated with additional eye characteristics including eyes that are spaced apart wider than usual (hypertelorism) and eyes that are crossed or do not point in the same direction (strabismus), which could be due to the shape of the orbit, or abnormalities in the muscles attached to the eye (anomalous extraocular muscles). There is also a higher incidence of refractive errors than in the general population. In over 1/3 of individuals, the various eye abnormalities can lead to a loss in vision.
Crouzon syndrome is associated with additional craniofacial characteristics. Affected individuals often have a prominent forehead (frontal bossing); a curved nose; unusually flat or underdeveloped mid-facial regions (midface hypoplasia); and a short upper lip. In addition, a small, underdeveloped upper jaw (hypoplastic maxilla) with protrusion of the lower jaw (relative mandibular prognathism) may also occur. Clefting of the lip and/or palate (incomplete closure of the palate or an abnormal groove in the upper lip) can occur rarely. Typical dental problems include a highly arched narrow palate with crowded teeth, and upper and lower teeth that don’t meet when biting (malocclusion).Approximately 30% of individuals with Crouzon syndrome develop hydrocephalus, a condition which is characterized by impaired flow or absorption of the fluid (i.e., cerebrospinal fluid [CSF]) that circulates through cavities (ventricles) of the brain and the spinal canal, potentially leading to increasing fluid pressure within the skull (intracranial pressure) and the brain and other associated findings.
Some affected individuals have hearing impairment due to an inability to transmit sound impulses to the brain (sensorineural hearing loss). In some infants, breathing problems may occur during the first few years due to a greatly reduced cross-sectional area of the airway. In severe instances, this can lead to life-threatening breathing complications, requiring creation of a surgical airway (tracheostomy).
While extracranial manifestations in Crouzon syndrome are not as common as with other craniosynostosis syndromes, up to 1/3 of individuals can have C2-C3 vertebral fusion.

