Cryptococcosis

synonyms:
Busse-Buschke DiseaseCryptococcic MeningitisCryptococcosis LungCryptococcosis SkinEuropean BlastomycosisTorular MeningitisTorulosis

overview:
Cryptococcosis is caused by a fungus known as Cryptococcosis neoformans. The infection may be spread to humans through contact with pigeon droppings or unwashed raw fruit. Contact with an infected individual may also spread the infection. Individuals with disorders characterized by lowered immunity (for instance, HIV infection) are at high risk for contracting these infections.
Cryptococcosis may appear in various forms depending on how the infection is acquired.  In most cases, the infection begins in the lungs (pulmonary form) and may then spread to the brain, urinary tract, skin, and/or bones (disseminated form). When the infection is limited to the lungs, symptoms may be minimal or not apparent at all. Respiratory symptoms may include coughing and chest pain. When the infection spreads, it tends to seek out the central nervous system, especially the brain. In some affected individuals, inflammation of the membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord (meningitis) may occur as a serious complication. Symptoms associated with meningitis may include dizziness, blurred vision, severe headache, and/or stiffness of the neck. In such cases, immediate treatment is essential to help prevent potentially life-threatening complications.

symptoms:
The pulmonary forms of this disease include acute infections and chronic pulmonary infections.  The disseminated forms include central nervous system (brain) infections, cutaneous (skin) infections, and infections involving other organs or systems.
Pulmonary forms.
Acute infections are only rarely diagnosed except in patients with weakened immune systems.  In people with normal immune systems, cryptoccosis may not result in any symptoms at all (asymptomatic).
Chronic pulmonary infections may generate rather large masses in the lobes of the lungs, as well as segmental pneumonia (involving parts of lungs), fluid in the lungs (pleural effusions), and swollen lymph nodes.
Disseminated forms
Central nervous system infections, especially of the brain, may present as only modestly severe rather than acute.  Complications may include an abnormally large head (hydrocephalus) and failing sight, among others.
Cutaneous or skin infections may present as fluid-filled bumps (papules), hardened plate-like patches (plaques), and ulcerous sores.
Infections of other organs or systems may involve sight (chorioretinitis), ears (otitis), the heart (myocarditis, endocarditis), the digestive system (gastroduodenitis, hepatitis), and the kidneys.
In general, symptoms of various forms of cryptococcosis may include: chest pain, dry cough, headache, nausea, confusion, blurred or double vision, fatigue, fever, unusual and excessive sweating at night, swollen glands without the appearance of infection in nearby areas, skin rash, pinpoint red spots (petechiae), bleeding into the skin, bruises, unintentional weight loss, appetite loss, abdominal bloating, abdominal pain, abdominal swelling, weakness, bone pain, and numbness and/or tingling.

