CTNNB1 Syndrome

synonyms:
CTNNB1 neurodevelopmental disorder (CTNNB1-NDD)neurodevelopmental disorder with spastic diplegia and visual defects (NEDSDV)severe intellectual disability-progressive spastic diplegia syndrome

overview:
Summary
CTNNB1 syndrome is an extremely rare genetic neurodevelopmental disorder caused by changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in theCTNNB1gene. Neurodevelopmental disorders are ones that impair or alter the growth and development of the brain and the central nervous system. Common signs and symptoms include varying degrees of intellectual disability (cognitive impairment), delays in reaching developmental milestones (developmental delays), speech delays, abnormal muscle tone, vision impairments, distinct facial features and behavioral problems. Less common features include feeding difficulties, abnormalities of body structure or function and growth abnormalities.

symptoms:
CTNNB1 syndrome is a collection of signs and symptoms that can vary between affected individuals. It is important to note that every individual is unique and how the disorder affects one person can be different from how it affects another.
Neurologic features are present in most individuals affected by CTNNB1 syndrome. A child’s progression through predictable developmental phases like sitting up and crawling may be delayed (developmental delays). Global developmental delays can affect intellectual development ranging from mild to severe and motor functions including muscle coordination to complete tasks like writing and walking. Speech delays and language disorders are common, but the degree of difficulty can range from speaking in simple sentences to communicating through signs, vocalization or manipulating objects.
Many individuals affected by CTNNB1 syndrome have altered muscle tone. Most babies have low muscle tone (hypotonia) in the torso which can affect motor developmental milestones and feeding ability. Later in childhood, most children experience abnormally high muscle tone (hypertonia) in the arms and legs, which causes prolonged muscle contractions and muscle tightness (spasticity) and can lead to difficulties with speech and movement like walking and stability. Many individuals experience involuntary contractions of the muscles (dystonia) that can cause abnormal body positions and repetitive or twisting movements.
Most people with CTNNB1 syndrome have vision difficulties. Some individuals have a problem seeing clearly (refractive errors) which can cause blurriness of objects that are up-close (farsighted) or at a distance (nearsighted). Focusing difficulties may occur from misalignment of the eyes where one eye aligns inward toward the nose or outward away from the nose while the other eye remains focused (strabismus). The back of the eye contains a nerve and blood vessel-rich lining (retina) which transmits visual images to the brain and makes it possible to see. Some individuals affected by CTNNB1 syndrome have a rare eye condition characterized by abnormal growth and development of the blood vessels in the retina (exudative vitreoretinopathy) which can lead to vision loss and more rarely, blindness. Rarely, the retina can detach from the back of the eye which can lead to blindness.
A variety of facial differences are common in individuals affected by CTNNB1 syndrome including a bulbous nose, a longer than usual vertical indentation that extends from the upper lip to the nose (philtrum) and a thin upper lip. Some individuals have sparse and thin hair and eyebrows and long eyelashes. Less common facial features include low set ears and eyes that are spaced closer than usual and a high roof of the mouth (palate).
Some individuals affected by CTNNB1 syndrome experience behavioral or psychiatric issues that can include anxiety, aggressive behavior, sleep difficulties, temper tantrums, attention problems and features suggestive of autism spectrum disorder.
Some individuals, especially babies, have feeding and gastrointestinal difficulties. Feeding challenges can include difficulty coordinating motor functions to breastfeed, chew food or swallow (dysphagia). Additionally, abnormal gastrointestinal motor functions can lead to frequent constipation, diarrhea and backflow of the contents of the stomach into the esophagus (gastroesophageal reflux).
Structural and growth abnormalities can occur in individuals affected by CTNNB1 syndrome. Infants may be born with a birth weight that is lower than expected based on sex (intrauterine growth restriction) and some children will continue to have difficulties gaining weight and growing in height. Infants may also be born with a head circumference that is smaller than expected based on age and sex (microcephaly) and may continue to have a smaller head compared to peers of the same age and sex as they grow. Occasionally, brain anomalies that can further contribute to developmental delays may occur including underdevelopment of the area of brain which connects the two cerebral hemispheres (hypoplasia of the corpus callosum) and an abnormal fluid space in the brain (ventriculomegaly). Rarely, as some children grow up, spinal anomalies that further affect motor functions can occur including abnormal restrictions on spinal cord movements (tethered spinal cord), abnormal growth of a fluid-filled pockets (cysts) in the spinal cord (syringomyelia) and an abnormal curvature of the spinal cord. A minority of children may be born with heart anomalies but may not experience any symptoms.

