Cushing Syndrome

synonyms:
hypercortisolismCushing's syndrome

overview:
Summary
Cushing syndrome is a rare endocrine disorder, characterized by a variety of symptoms and physical abnormalities that occur as a result of excessive amounts of the hormone cortisol, a vital glucocorticoid. Glucocorticoids are a class of steroid hormones that are important in the regulation of the metabolism of glucose, and also modulate the response to stress. Although it may occur in children, Cushing syndrome most commonly affects adults between the ages of 25 to 40. It can be caused by prolonged exposure to elevated levels of glucocorticoids produced within the body (endogenous) or introduced from outside the body (exogenous). Symptoms can include weight gain, obesity, a rounded face, thin purple streaks (purple striae) which occur on the skin, increased fat around the neck and slender arms and legs. Children with Cushing syndrome are typically obese and have delay in growth.
Introduction
In 1912, Harvey Cushing described a patient who had typical features of hypercortisolemia, but assumed it to be a “polyglandular” disorder. The cause was disputed for almost 40 years. Cushing disease, which is pituitary adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH) dependent Cushing syndrome produced by a benign pituitary tumor, was first definitively described by Dr. Cushing in 1932. Although pituitary surgery was introduced in the early 20th century, it was not until 1933 that pituitary neurosurgery began to be performed on patients with Cushing disease.

symptoms:
People with Cushing syndrome gain an excessive amount of weight. Obesity extends to include fat deposits around the face causing a “moon-shaped” or rounded appearance. Fat also accumulates around the neck (supraclavicular) and upper back (dorsal cervical) areas. Obesity also occurs in the trunk of the body (“centripetal obesity”), but the arms and legs remain slender. People with Cushing syndrome may have skin that is reddened, thin, fragile and slow to heal. The connective tissue may also become weak, resulting in the appearance of reddish-blue stretch marks on the arms, breasts, underarms (axillae), abdomen, buttocks and/or thighs.
Women with Cushing syndrome may have excessive body hair (hirsutism) on the face, neck, chest, abdomen and/or thighs. Acne affecting the face, chest and back may also develop. Some people have thinning and loss of the hair on the head, and some women may develop menstrual irregularities (oligoamenorrhea, amenorrhea). Men and women with this disorder may experience a decrease in fertility and a diminished or absent sex drive (loss of libido).
Children and adolescents with Cushing syndrome may experience delayed growth with or without weight gain and/or hypertension. Growth does not always stop entirely; it may be slower than before or only partially affected; however, Cushing syndrome in growing children always affects growth in one way or another.
Abnormally high blood pressure (hypertension) occurs in approximately 85 percent of people with Cushing syndrome. Bones may become brittle and break easily. This occurs as a result of progressive bone thinning (osteoporosis). Other features often include abnormally high blood sugar (diabetes mellitus, hyperglycemia), increased thirst and urination, impaired immune function leading to frequent bacterial and fungal infections, severe weakness, fatigue, easy bruising and muscle wasting (lower limbs muscle atrophy). Mild to severe psychic disturbances, including anxiety, depression and irritability, occur in many patients. Headache may also be present. Sleep disorders and sleep apnea are frequent in advanced cases. Some patients note cognitive difficulties and troubles with work performance and interpersonal relationships.

