Cutaneous T-Cell Lymphomas

synonyms:
CTCL

overview:
General Discussion
Summary
Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (CTCLs) are a group of disorders characterized by abnormal accumulation of malignant T-cells in the skin potentially resulting in the development of rashes, plaques and tumors. CTCLs belong to a larger group of disorders known as non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas (NHLs), which are related malignancies (cancers) that affect the lymphatic system (lymphomas).
Introduction
Functioning as part of the immune system, the lymphatic system helps to protect the body against infection and disease. It consists of a network of tubular channels (lymph vessels) that drain a thin watery fluid known as lymph from different areas of the body into the bloodstream. Lymph accumulates in the tiny spaces between tissue cells and contains proteins, fats, and certain white blood cells known as lymphocytes.
There are two main types of lymphocytes: B-lymphocytes, which may produce specific antibodies to “neutralize” certain invading microorganisms, and T-lymphocytes, which may directly destroy microorganisms or assist in the activities of other lymphocytes. CTCLs result from errors in the production of T-lymphocytes or transformation of T-lymphocytes into malignant cells. In CTCLs, abnormal, uncontrolled growth and multiplication (proliferation) of malignant T-lymphocytes result in accumulation of these lymphocytes in the skin. In some cases, malignant lymphocytes may spread to affect the lymph nodes and eventually to other bodily tissues and organs, potentially resulting in life-threatening complications. The specific symptoms and physical findings may vary from case to case, depending upon the extent and region(s) of involvement, the specific type of CTCL present, and various additional factors.
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas, such as CTCLs, may also be categorized based upon certain characteristics of the cancer cells as seen under a microscope and how quickly they may tend to grow and spread. For example, CTCLs may be characterized as “low-grade” (or indolent) lymphomas, which tend to grow slowly and result in few associated symptoms, or “intermediate-grade” or “high-grade” (aggressive) lymphomas, which typically grow rapidly, requiring prompt treatment. Most cases of CTCL, especially the classic form (mycosis fungoides), are slow-growing (indolent) lymphomas.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms associated with cutaneous T-cell lymphomas vary greatly from case to case, depending upon the specific type of lymphoma present and how far the disease has progressed (i.e., staging). (For further information on stages, please see the section entitled “Standard Therapies: Diagnosis” [Staging] below.)
The most common type and classic presentation of CTCL is known as mycosis fungoides and usually progresses slowly over many years. The associated skin symptoms of mycosis fungoides progress through three separate phases. Affected individuals may first develop a red rash or dry, red, scaly patches of skin that most often affect the buttocks and trunk (premyotic phase). These patches may remain unchanged, spontaneously go away, or slowly grow larger. The skin lesions associated with the initial phase of mycosis fungoides are termed “nonspecific” because they cannot be differentiated from skin lesions associated with other, more common, skin disorders such as psoriasis. This initial phase of mycosis fungoides may persist for months, years, or decades.
In the second phase of mycosis fungoides, slightly-elevated, reddish-brown, scaly bumps (plaques) develop on the skin (mycotic stage). These plaques may develop from existing patches or spontaneously in unaffected areas. Eventually, these plaques may expand and grow together (coalesce) forming larger plaques. Any area of the body may be affected.
The skin lesions associated with the first two phases of mycosis fungoides may not be associated with other symptoms (asymptomatic) or may occur along with itchiness (pruritis) and pain. In rare cases, affected individuals may experience difficulty sleeping due to severe itchiness.
The third phase of mycosis fungoides is characterized by the development of mushroom-shaped tumors. In some cases, the tumors may become ulcerated and infected. Some individuals may not progress beyond the plaque phase of mycosis fungoides and do not develop tumors. Other individuals may develop tumors without first developing the patches or plaques associated with the early stages of mycosis fungoides (tumeur d’ emblee variant).
In approximately 10 percent of individuals with the classic mycosis fungoides presentation of CTCL, malignant lymphocytes may spread beyond the skin to affect the lymph nodes and major organs of the body including the liver, spleen and gastrointestinal system. Depending upon specific sites and extent of involvement, disease management, and additional factors, disease progression may eventually lead to life-threatening complications. (For more information on this disorder, choose “mycosis fungoides” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
In rare cases, affected individuals may develop Sezary syndrome, a form of CTCL that is considered the leukemic variant of mycosis fungoides. It is characterized by a widespread red rash that may cover most of the body (generalized erythroderma), the presence of specific malignant lymphocytes (Sezary cells) in the blood, and abnormally enlarged lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy). Individuals with Sezary syndrome may experience intense itchiness (pruritis) and thickening, scaling, and peeling (exfoliation) of the skin. Additional symptoms associated with Sezary syndrome include outward turning of the eyelids (ectropion); abnormally thick, rough skin on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet (palmoplantar keratoderma); malformation of the nails (onychodystrophy); and abnormal enlargement of the liver and/or spleen (hepatosplenomegaly). General symptoms associated with Sezary syndrome include fevers, weight loss, bald patches on the scalp (alopecia), and a general feeling of ill health (malaise).
Granulomatous slack skin is a rare form of CTCL characterized by areas (folds) of lax, reddened skin. The underarms, groin, and stomach are most often affected. Granulomatous slack skin is usually a benign, slow-growing (indolent) form of CTCL. In some cases, affected individuals may develop a more serious form of CTCL, such as mycosis fungoides, later during life.
Primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphomas represent a subgroup of CTCL characterized by positive expression of the CD30 (Ki-1) antigen. Affected individuals develop tumors on the skin. The tumors may become ulcerated or infected. In some cases, the lesions or tumors go away without treatment (spontaneous regression). However, lesions often return (relapse). In rare cases, other organ systems of the body may become involved.
Lymphomatoid papulosis is a rare skin disorder that some researchers believe is an early from of CD30+ lymphoma. The disorder is characterized by groups of slightly-elevated, reddish-brown bumps (nodules or papules) that most often affect the trunk, face, and arms and legs. These lesions often become crusted or ulcerated, sometimes leaving a scar. Approximately 5-20 percent of individuals with lymphomatoid papulosis develop CTCL. Other researchers believe that lymphomatoid papulosis is a similar, yet distinct, “premalignant” condition and not a form of CTCL.
Subcutaneous pannulitic T-cell lymphoma is a rare variant of CTCL. Affected individuals may have multiple, tender, bumps (nodules) just under the surface of the skin of various areas of the body especially the arms and legs (extremities). These nodules may lead to inflammation of the subcutaneous layer of fat (panniculitis). Affected individuals may also experience weight loss, fevers, and joint pain (arthralgia). Unlike mycosis fungoides, this form of CTCL is often aggressive may lead to the involvement of other organ systems and, potentially, life-threatening complications.
Pagetoid reticulosis (PR), also known as Woringer-Kolopp disease, is a rare skin condition characterized by a solitary lesion that usually affects the arms or legs and may grow slowly. The lesion is similar in appearance to the lesions associated with mycosis fungoides. In addition, there are also microscopic similarities between the skin lesions in mycosis fungoides and pagetoid reticulosis. Consequently, most researchers believe that PR is a slow-growing variant of CTCL.
According to the medical literature, cases have been reported in which individuals developed more than one form of CTCL at the same time.

