Cutis Laxa

synonyms:
Elastolysis

overview:
Summary
Cutis laxa is a general term for a group of rare disorders that may occur in several inherited (congenital) forms or acquired at some point during life (acquired cutis laxa). This group of disorders involves a wide spectrum of symptoms and signs that result from defects in connective tissue, the material between cells of the body that gives the tissue form and strength. Connective tissue is found throughout the body in muscles, joints, skin and other organs. Cutis laxa is characterized by skin that is loose (lax), wrinkled, sagging, redundant, and lacking elasticity (inelastic). When stretched, inelastic skin returns to place abnormally slowly. The skin around the face, arms, legs and trunk is most commonly affected. Abnormal skin may give affected individuals and children a prematurely-aged appearance and they can look much older than their true age. Unlike similar skin disorders, easy bruising and scarring are generally not associated with cutis laxa. The joints are often abnormally loose (hypermobility) because of lax ligaments and tendons. Several inherited forms of the disorder have been identified. Most cases are inherited as either an autosomal dominant or recessive disorder. An X-linked form of cutis laxa, known as occipital horn syndrome, is now considered a mild form of disorders of copper metabolism caused by a mutation in the ATP7A gene and is not discussed in this report.

symptoms:
Cutis laxa encompasses a wide variety of disorders. The specific symptoms present, severity and prognosis can vary greatly depending upon the specific type of cutis laxa and the presence and extent of associated symptoms. The specific symptoms and severity can vary even among individuals with the same subtype and even among members of the same family. In addition, some subtypes of cutis laxa have only been reported in a handful of individuals, which prevents physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis. Despite the wide variety in presentation, most affected individuals develop the characteristic skin abnormalities and joints problems described above.
In the past, cutis laxa subtypes were defined by clinical symptoms. However, cutis laxa is now separated based upon the molecular basis of the disorders (i.e. mutated gene). The information below is broken down by specific subtype.
EFEMP2-RELATED CUTIS LAXA
This disorder is also known as FBLN4-related cutis laxa or autosomal recessive cutis laxa type 1B (ARCL1B). It is a highly variable disorder that range from severe, life-threatening complications early in life (i.e. heart or lung [cardiopulmonary] failure) to cases that are limited to vascular disease and abnormalities of the head and face (craniofacial abnormalities).
Individuals with EFEMP2-related cutis laxa develop the skin symptoms of cutis laxa as well as systemic involvement, particularly the cardiovascular and skeletal systems. The skin symptoms may be mild. Affected infants may have distinctive facial features including eyes that are farther apart than normal (ocular hypertelorism), low-set, malformed (dysplastic) ears, highly arched palate, and a small, receding jaw (retrognathia). Joint laxity and arachnodactyly, a condition in which the fingers and toes are abnormally long, thin and curved, are common findings.
Affected individuals may develop abnormalities affecting various blood vessels including twisting or distortion of arteries (arterial tortuosity), a stretched or bulging section of the wall of the main artery of the heart (aortic aneurysm), and underdevelopment of the arteries of the lungs (pulmonary arterial hypoplasia). In some cases, affected individuals may also develop abnormal enlargement of the heart (cardiac hypertrophy) and a slower than normal heart rate (bradycardia). In severe cases, the various vascular and cardiac abnormalities can progress to cause heart failure.
Some individuals with EFEMP2-related cutis laxa develop pulmonary emphysema, a chronic lung disease in which the tiny air sacs in the lungs (alveoli) are damaged or do not function properly, resulting in shortness of breath and a chronic cough. Pulmonary emphysema can progress to cause lung failure.
Additional symptoms can develop in some cases of EFEMP2-related cutis laxa including diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), a sunken chest (pectus excavatum), and fragile bones that are prone to fracture. Diaphragmatic hernia, a condition in which part of the stomach and/or the small intestines can protrude into the chest cavity, can also occur.
FBLN5-RELATED CUTIS LAXA
This disorder is also known as autosomal recessive cutis laxa type 1A (ARCL1A). The symptoms and age of onset are highly variable. Affected individuals develop the skin and joint symptoms of cutis laxa. Growth deficiencies and delayed motor development have been reported in some cases.
There is usually childhood onset of serious complications such as narrowing (stenosis) of the pulmonary artery, hernias, and the formation of diverticula within the intestines and bladder. In some cases, stenosis of the aorta just above the valve that connects the aorta to the heart may occur (supravalvular aortic stenosis). In severe cases, the disorder can progress to cause life-threatening complications such as pulmonary or cardiac insufficiency or failure during childhood. In affected individuals who survive early childhood, additional serious complications such as failure of the right side of the heart (cor pulmonale) and severe pulmonary emphysema may develop.
LTBP4-RELATED CUTIS LAXA
This disorder is also known as Urban-Rifkin-Davis syndrome or autosomal recessive cutis laxa type 1C (ARCL1C). In addition to the skin symptoms of cutis laxa, affected individuals can develop joint laxity, diminished muscle tone, growth delays, and severe complications affecting the pulmonary, gastrointestinal, and urinary systems. Cardiovascular involvement is relatively mild.
Affected individuals may develop severe breathing difficulties (respiratory distress) associated with cystic changes in the lungs as well as collapse of part of the lung (atelectasis). In some cases, pulmonary issues can be worsened by narrowing of the pulmonary artery and by the occurrence of diaphragmatic hernia and/or softening or weakening of the cartilage of the trachea (tracheomalacia), which can potentially result in the collapse of the air passage. Severe emphysema can develop. Eventually, affected individuals may experience respiratory failure.
Gastrointestinal abnormalities include the formation of diverticula and narrowing, twisting or enlargement of segments of the intestinal tract. Urinary tract abnormalities can include abnormal accumulation of urine in the kidneys (hydronephrosis) and the formation of sac-like protrusions or pouches in the intestines (diverticulosis).
Individuals with LTBP4-related cutis laxa may have distinctive facial features including an abnormally small jaw (micrognathia), receding forehead, widened soft spots near the back of the head (wide anterior fontanels), widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), and, in some cases, prominent ears. The middle of the face may appear flattened. Growth deficiencies during infancy have also been reported.
ATP6V0A2-RELATED CUTIS LAXA
This disorder is also known autosomal recessive cutis laxa 2A (ARCL2A) and represents a spectrum of disease ranging from wrinkly skin syndrome on the mild end to Debre-type cutis laxa on the severe end. Generally, individuals with the Debre-type have more severe neurological and developmental abnormalities, but less severe skin symptoms. Individuals with wrinkled skin syndrome have only mild developmental delays and subsequent neurodegeneration.
Affected individuals may have wrinkled or furrowed skin over the entire body. The skin may be redundant, saggy and inelastic as well. Skin symptoms often improve with age, but degenerative scars may remain in some cases.
Infants may experience diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), abnormal fat distribution, feeding difficulties, growth deficiency, and failure to thrive. In addition, affected infants may have an enlarged soft spot (fontanel) that closes later than normal and distinctive facial features that are present at birth and become more distinctive as they grow older. Such features include downward slanting of the opening between the eyelids (down slanting palpebral fissures), a broad, flat bridge of the nose, abnormally large nostrils that are tipped upward (anteverted nares), large ears, and a small mouth.
Affected infants may also exhibit nearsightedness (myopia), eyes that do not line up in the same direction such as crossed-eyes (strabismus), dislocation of the hip that is present at birth, joint laxity, and microcephaly, a condition in which head circumference is smaller than would normally be expected based upon age and gender. Some infants may have protrusion of abdominal tissue or part of the small intestines through a bulge in the abdominal muscles near the groin (inguinal hernia).
Most affected children have malformations of certain areas of the brain (cortical and cerebellar malformations) that result in delays in reaching developmental milestones (developmental delays) and intellectual disability. Progressive neurological decline (regressions) may begin near the end of the first decade of life. Some children may experience generalized or partial seizures usually between the ages of 8-12.
Neurological regression can be associated with a variety of symptoms including slurred speech, an inability to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia), and increased muscle tone and stiffness (spasticity). Some affected children may eventually require a wheelchair.
Cardiovascular and pulmonary complications common in other forms of cutis laxa are rare in ATP6V0A2-related cutis laxa.
This disorder is also classified as a congenital disorder of glycosylation, which is an umbrella term for an expanding group of rare metabolic disorders that share similar but not identical genetic changes (mutations) and biochemical activity. These disorders involve a normal, but complex, chemical process known as glycosylation. (For more information, choose “congenital disorders of glycosylation” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
PYCR1-RELATED CUTIS LAXA
This disorder is also known as autosomal recessive cutis laxa 2B (ARCL2B). The skin symptoms of cutis laxa are more pronounced in the arms and legs. Affected individuals may experience growth delays, developmental delays, failure to thrive, intellectual disability, joint laxity and skeletal malformations. Underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the thick band of nerve fibers that separates the cerebellum into right and left hemispheres (corpus callosum) is common. Affected individuals may also have distinctive facial features including an abnormally large forehead, large ears, a rounded (bulbous) nose, a protruding jaw (prognathism), bluish discoloration of the whites of the eyes (blue sclera), and a triangular-shaped face with a prematurely-aged appearance. The circumference of the head may be smaller than expected based upon an infant’s age and gender (microcephaly).
Skeletal malformations may include sideways curvature of the spine (scoliosis), bowing of the long bones of the arms and legs, clasped thumbs, abnormally long fingers and toes, reduced bone density (osteopenia), fragile bones that are prone to fracture (osteoporosis), and congenital dislocation of the hip.
The specific symptoms and severity of PYCR1-related cutis laxa can vary greatly. Individuals originally diagnosed with gerodermia osteodysplastica, wrinkled skin syndrome and De Barsy syndrome have been found to carry a PYCR1 gene mutation.
ALDH18A1-RELATED CUTIS LAXA
This disorder is also known as autosomal recessive cutis laxa type 3 (ARCL3). Affected individuals develop the characteristic skin symptoms of cutis laxa along with growth deficiencies, moderate to severe intellectual disability, loose joints, cataracts and corneal abnormalities. Additional symptoms may eventually develop including dystonia, a group of movement disorders that vary in their symptoms, causes, progression, and treatments. This group of neurological conditions is generally characterized by involuntary muscle contractions that force the body in abnormal, sometimes painful, movements and positions (postures). Individuals with this form of cutis laxa usually do not have cardiovascular or pulmonary complications. Many individuals with de Barsy syndrome were found to have a mutation in the ALDH18A1 gene. NORD has an individual report on de Barsy syndrome. For more information, choose “De Barsy” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.
AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT CUTIS LAXA
Most cases of autosomal dominant cutis laxa are caused by mutations in the elastin (ELN) gene and are also known as ELN-related cutis laxa or autosomal dominant cutis laxa type 1 (ADCL1). One case, classified as autosomal dominant cutis laxa type 2 (ADCL2), was caused by a mutation in the fibulin-5 (FBLN5) gene; this gene also causes autosomal recessive cutis laxa 1A.
The symptoms of ELN-related cutis laxa can appear at any point between birth and young adulthood. Generally, onset is later than seen in autosomal recessive forms of the disorder. Affected individuals may have distinctive facial features, which can include a beaked nose, an abnormally long groove that runs from the base of the nose to the upper lip (philtrum), a high forehead, and large ears. In some cases, individuals will only develop the characteristic skin symptoms of cutis laxa, although the affected skin may worsen with age. The cutis laxa skin symptoms in the autosomal forms are generally milder than the skin symptoms in the recessive forms. Less often, affected individuals will also develop more serious complications including cardiovascular and pulmonary abnormalities such as aortic aneurysms, pulmonary artery disease, or emphysema. Inguinal hernia has also been reported. Gastrointestinal abnormalities are uncommon with this form of cutis laxa.
Autosomal recessive ELN-related cutis laxa has been reported
GERODERMA OSTEODYSPLASTICUM
This rare disorder is also known as gerodermia osteodysplastica or Walt Disney dwarfism and is sometimes classified as a subtype of autosomal recessive cutis laxa type 2. Geroderma osteodysplasticum primarily occurs in infants or young children and is characterized by loose skin, particularly affecting the hands, feet, face and stomach. Affected individuals may have distinctive facial features including underdevelopment of the cheeks (malar hypoplasia), a protruding jaw (prognathism), and a prematurely aged appearance. Joint laxity, hernias, frequent hip dislocations, and varying degrees of growth deficiency and short stature can also occur. Osteoporosis may also present, resulting in fragile bones that are prone to fracture. More severe complications such as cardiovascular or pulmonary symptoms rarely develop.
RIN2-RELATED CUTIS LAXA
This extremely rare disorder, also known as (M)acrocephaly, (A)lopecia, (C)utis laxa (S)coliosis or MACS syndrome, has only been reported in several individuals from four families (kindreds) from different ethnic origins. Symptoms include an abnormally large head (macrocephaly), partial or complete hair loss (alopecia) and the skin symptoms of cutis laxa. Cutis laxa is mild with redundant skin on the face the most common manifestation. However, because the disorder has been reported in so few individuals, the complete clinical picture and the symptoms that most often associated with the disorder are unknown. Additional symptoms that were reported in the affected families include joint laxity, moderate to severe scoliosis, and characteristic facial features including abnormal enlargement of the gums (gingival hyperplasia), a lower lip that is turned or rolled outward (everted), a receded jaw (retrognathia), puffy eyelids, and abnormal positioning of the teeth. Some infants may have dry, scaly, thickened skin. Widening (dilation) of the aorta and generalized osteoporosis have also been reported. Mild intellectual disability was seen in some, but not all, affected individuals.
ACQUIRED CUTIS LAXA
This form of cutis laxa is generally seen in adults. Affected individuals develop the characteristic skin symptoms associated with cutis laxa. Acquired cutis laxa may begin in the face and progresses downward. Systemic involvement including emphysema, vascular abnormalities, intestinal diverticula, and hernias has also been reported in some cases. The disorder has developed in some individuals following exposure to specific environmental factors such as certain medications, infections or autoimmune diseases.
Acquired cutis laxa is sometimes broken down into type 1 and type 2. Type 1 may be associated with cutis laxa that is widespread through the body or localized to a specific area and can occur at any age, although most cases begin in adulthood. Localized forms frequently affect the face or the hands and feet. Systemic involvement may occur in some cases. Type 2 usually develops following acute inflammatory skin lesions, in which the areas affected by the skin lesions develop cutis laxa skin symptoms.

