Cyclic Vomiting Syndrome

synonyms:
adult cyclic vomiting syndromeabdominal migrainechildhood cyclic vomitingCVScyclical vomitingperiodic syndrome

overview:
Cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS) is an uncommon disorder affecting both children and adults and characterized by recurrent episodes of severe nausea and vomiting. An episode may last for a few hours to several days and is then followed by a period of time during which affected individuals are relatively free of severe nausea and vomiting. Some can experience milder symptoms between attacks. This alternating pattern of disease and disease-free periods distinguishes cyclic vomiting syndrome from other gastrointestinal disorders. For each person who suffers from this condition, the episodes are similar to each other. The associated nausea and vomiting can be severe enough to incapacitate the individual who may be unable to walk or talk and/or be bedridden. Additional symptoms often present during an episode including dizziness, paleness of the skin (pallor), lack of energy (listlessness) and, abdominal pain and headaches. Oftentimes, nausea is the most disturbing symptom, more so than vomiting. Some affected children outgrow these episodes as they get older but for many others, CVS transitions into migraine headache. Cyclic vomiting syndrome may affect children more often than adults. The exact causes of cyclic vomiting syndrome remains unknown in many people, but a cause or risk factors can be determined in many others.

symptoms:
The hallmark of cyclic vomiting syndrome is recurrent episodes of severe nausea and vomiting. In children, these episodes usually last for several hours to a few days. In adults, episodes tend to occur less frequently, but can last longer, even over a week. These recurrent, characteristic episodes are quite similar within each individual, often beginning at the same time of day, with similar severity, duration and associated symptoms as in previous episodes. Episodes often occur in the early morning hours or upon awakening in the morning. Affected individuals may only experience episodes several times a year or as frequently as several times a month. On occasion, after years of cycling, episodes can “coalesce” together with daily nausea and vomiting between severe attacks such that there is no symptom-free period.
The nausea and vomiting that characterize CVS episodes are often quite severe. Nausea can be persistent and intense. Unlike most other gastrointestinal disorders, the vomiting in CVS may not relieve the nausea. Affected children may experience bouts of rapid-fire, projectile vomiting as frequently as four or more times per hour with a peak pace of every 5-15 minutes. After the contents of the stomach are emptied, individuals may continue to dry heave. Symptoms can be so severe that affected individuals are unable to walk or talk and in some cases may appear unconscious or comatose. Episodes may cause affected individuals to withdraw from social interaction. The behavior of drinking water to dilute the bile and induce vomiting and hence reduce nausea is common, and should not be confused with a psychogenic cause. More commonly described in adults but also occurring in children, many take prolonged hot showers or baths to alleviate the nausea.
Additional symptoms may occur during an episode including paleness of the skin (pallor), lack of energy (lethargy), fever and drooling. The vomit may be bilious (green or yellow). Repetitive vomiting may cause loss of vital fluids (dehydration). Gastrointestinal symptoms such as severe abdominal pain, diarrhea and retching (gagging) are not uncommon. Affected individuals have a reduced appetite and weight loss may occur. Some individuals may exhibit a variety of migraine-like neurological symptoms including headaches, abnormal sensitivity to light (photophobia), increased sensitivity to sound (phonophobia) and dizziness or vertigo.
Many affected individuals can identify a precipitating event or “trigger” that sets off an episode of CVS. Stress is a common trigger, more commonly excitement/positive stress (birthdays, holidays) than negative stress. Additional triggers include infection, certain foods, alcohol, physical exhaustion, lack of sleep, motion sickness and incoming weather fronts. In adolescents and women, menstruation may trigger an episode. Many adults with cyclic vomiting syndrome are prone to anxiety or panic attacks which can trigger episodes.

