Cystic Fibrosis

synonyms:
CFfibrocystic disease of pancreasmucoviscidosispancreatic fibrosis

overview:
Cystic fibrosis is a genetic disorder that often affects multiple organ systems of the body. Cystic fibrosis is characterized by abnormalities affecting certain glands (exocrine) of the body especially those that produce mucus. Saliva and sweat glands may also be affected. Exocrine glands secrete substances through ducts, either internally (e.g., glands in the lungs) or externally (e.g., sweat glands). In cystic fibrosis, these secretions become abnormally thick and can clog up vital areas of the body causing inflammation, obstruction and infection. The symptoms of cystic fibrosis can vary greatly in number and severity from one individual to another. Common symptoms include breathing (respiratory) abnormalities including a persistent cough, shortness of breath and lung infections; obstruction of the pancreas, which prevents digestive enzymes from reaching the intestines to help break down food and may result in poor growth and poor nutrition; and obstruction of the intestines. Cystic fibrosis is slowly progressive and often causes chronic lung damage, which eventually results in life-threatening complications. Because of improved treatments and new treatment options, the outlook and overall quality of life of individuals with cystic fibrosis has improved and over 50 percent of individuals with the disorder are adults. Cystic fibrosis is caused by mutations to the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene and is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.

symptoms:
The symptoms of cystic fibrosis result because mucus secretions are abnormally thick and sticky, whereas normally they are thin and slippery and serve as a protective lubricant. Other secreted material such as saliva, sweat and digestive juices may also be affected. These abnormal secretions can clog up vital tubes, ducts and passageways throughout the body.
Multiple organ systems may be affected by cystic fibrosis, especially the lungs and pancreas. The intestines, liver, sweat glands and reproductive organs also are frequently affected. The symptoms of cystic fibrosis can vary greatly from one individual to another. Some individuals may only have respiratory problems without other complications. Some individuals may only have a few mild symptoms; others may have serious complications. The severity of specific symptoms also varies. In early life, many individuals may have mild respiratory complications, while others may have serious, life-threatening respiratory complications. Affected individuals will not have all the symptoms discussed below.
Cystic fibrosis is often apparent shortly after birth, but before newborn screening, when symptoms were not severe, CF may not have been detected until years later and, in rare cases, even as late as during adulthood. Most cases diagnosed in adulthood have no associated symptoms (asymptomatic) or only very mild symptoms. At this time, newborn screening for CF is provided throughout the United States, and thus it has become much rarer for CF to be newly diagnosed later in life.
Affected individuals develop a variety of breathing (respiratory) complications due to the production of thick, sticky mucus that clogs various air passages in the body. Associated symptoms include a persistent cough that often produces mucus or phlegm (productive cough), wheezing, and shortness of breath. Because mucus clogs the airways, bacteria become trapped and accumulate within the lungs and air passages making individuals particularly prone to developing repeated (chronic) respiratory infections that lead to inflammation of the main air passages of the lungs (bronchitis), inflammation of the sinuses (sinusitis) and inflammation of the lungs. Clogging of the airways with mucus may also make it difficult to breath.
The immune system of individuals with cystic fibrosis responds to an infection by sending white blood cells to attack the infection. After attacking the infection, white blood cells break down and further clog the airways. Debris from the white blood cells can be very destructive to lung tissue, and is thought to be a major contributor to the lung damage that occurs in cystic fibrosis. Further, this debris tends to be very “sticky,” which adds to the difficulty of its clearance from the lungs. The repeated cycle of infection and immune system response progressively damages the lungs. Chronic mucus blockage and infection of the respiratory passageways may cause them to become abnormally widened (bronchiestasis), which permits more mucus to build up and further increase the risk of infection. Eventually, continued damage to the lungs can cause life-threatening respiratory failure or enlargement and improper function of the lower right chamber (ventricle) of the heart (cor pulmonale). Enlargement of the ventricle occurs because the heart must work harder to try and pump blood through the damaged lungs.
In many cases, cystic fibrosis causes pancreatic insufficiency. The pancreas is a small organ located behind the stomach that secretes enzymes that travel to the intestines and aid in digestion. The pancreas also secretes other hormones such as insulin, which helps break down sugar. When mucous builds up in the pancreatic ducts, it may block the enzymes from reaching the intestines and helping the breakdown and absorption of food and nutrients. Failure of the body to breakdown and absorb nutrients is called malabsorption and can result in a variety of nutritional deficiencies in affected individuals. In childhood, it may result in failure of an affected child to grow and gain weight at the expected rate for age and sex (failure to thrive). Affected individuals may also have large, loose, foul-smelling stools that contain and excess of fat (steatorrhea) and other nutrients due to malabsorption.
The first symptom in 10-20% of cases diagnosed during infancy is meconium ileus -obstruction of the intestines at birth with a thick, tarry substance called meconium. Meconium is the medical term for an infant’s first stool, which is passed shortly after birth.
CF causes an abnormality that prevents the absorption of salt from sweat, which results in higher than normal levels of salt in the sweat. Salt depletion may upset the balance of minerals in the body, causing abnormal heart rhythms or the body to overheat.
Mucus can also accumulated within the small tubes that carry bile from the liver to the intestines (bile ducts) causing obstruction and inflammation. In some cases, high blood pressure of the major vein that carries blood to the liver from the digestive organs may occur (portal hypertension). Obstruction of the bile ducts can damage the liver, eventually leading to scarring of the liver (cirrhosis). Damage to the liver can potentially become life-threatening.
Most boys with cystic fibrosis are born without the small tubes that carry sperm out from the testes (congenital absence of the vas deferens) resulting in infertility. In other cases, male infertility may be caused by underdevelopment (atrophy) or damage (fibrosis) of the vas deferens. In some girls, fertility may be reduced due to the accumulation of abnormal mucus in the cervix and irregular menstrual periods.
Additional respiratory symptoms may be associated with cystic fibrosis including the development of small growths in the nose (nasal polyps), coughing up of blood (hemoptysis), recurrent episodes of lung collapse (pneumothorax), and abnormally fast breathing (tachypnea).
Additional gastrointestinal symptoms associated with cystic fibrosis may occur including recurrent abdominal pain, bloating (distention) of the abdomen, backflow of the contents of the stomach into the tube (esophagus) that connects the back of the mouth to the stomach (gastroesophageal reflux) and protrusion of part of the rectum through the anus (rectal prolapse). In some cases, the gall bladder may be filled with thick, sticky mucus and fail to function properly. The gall bladder is a small, pear-shaped organ located under the liver that stores bile. Some individuals may develop gall stones.
Most individuals with cystic fibrosis develop rounding or flattening (clubbing) of the tips of the fingers or toes.
Individuals with cystic fibrosis may be at risk for developing cystic fibrosis-related diabetes mellitus (CFRD). CFRD may occur in some adolescents with cystic fibrosis, although the prevalence increases during adulthood, as the longer patients live with cystic fibrosis, the more likely they are to develop CFRD. The onset of CFRD is slow and individuals may not have symptoms (asymptomatic). CFRD develops due to damage to the pancreas (which limits insulin production) and increased resistance to insulin. CFRD can also worsen lung function in affected individuals.
Another specific condition that may develop in individuals with cystic fibrosis is known as distal intestinal obstruction syndrome (DIOS), in which food, mucus and stool clog the intestines. This condition can cause stomach aches, bloating, cramping, nausea and loss of appetite. In severe cases, it may cause pain, vomiting and watery stools. The incidence of DIOS appears to increase with age; most cases tend to occur in adolescents and adults.

