Cysticercosis

synonyms:
neurocysticercosis (NCC)solitary cysticercus granuloma

overview:
Summary
Cysticercosis is caused by the pork tapewormTaenia solium. Cysticercosis is most seen in endemic regions (Central and South America, sub-Saharan Africa, and Asia (including China, southeast Asia, and India)), where 10 to 20 percent of individuals have evidence of the disease. Cysticercosis can also be found in non-endemic regions in immigrant populations, or in people who have traveled to endemic regions. Cysticercosis can affect anyone at any age. The symptoms of cysticercosis depend on where the infection is in the body, the cyst burden, and the host’s immune response to the infection. Cysts in the nervous system can cause symptoms such as seizures, headache, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, altered mental status, altered vision, accumulation of excessive fluid (cerebrospinal fluid) in the skull (hydrocephalus), and inflammation of the tissue surrounding the brain (arachnoiditis). Cysts in the eye can cause visual disturbances or vision loss, limited eye movement, inflammation in the eye (uveitis), or inflammation of the retina (retinitis). Cysts that develop outside of the nervous system usually do not cause symptoms (asymptomatic), though small hard lumps (nodules) may develop under the skin but will eventually disappear. Treatment of cysticercosis depends on the location of the infection in the body, and is individualized for each person. Cysticercosis located outside of the nervous system usually does not require specific treatment. The treatment for cysticercosis located within the nervous system (neurocysticercosis) consists of antiparasitic therapy, corticosteroids, antiepileptic drugs, and/or surgery.
Introduction
The pork tapeworm (Taenia solium) is a parasite that can cause two types of infections in humans: taeniasis, and cysticercosis. Taeniasis is an intestinal infection with the adult form of the pork tapeworm, resulting from the ingestion of undercooked pork. Conversely, cysticercosis arises from the ingestion of the pork tapeworm’s eggs through fecal-oral contamination, and involves the development of cysts throughout the body, but not in the intestinal tract. This report focuses on cysticercosis, and not taeniasis.
The names of the clinical syndromes of cysticercosis depend on where the cyst(s) are in the body. The development of cysts can happen in many tissues throughout the body. Thus, the nomenclature for cysticercosis can be confusing. The following is a brief review of the terminology used:
If the cysts are located outside the nervous system, then it is called extraneural cysticercosis. Extraneural cysticercosis occurs most commonly in subcutaneous tissue, muscle tissue or heart (cardiac) tissue. If the cysts are in the nervous system, then it is called neurocysticercosis (NCC). In NCC, a cyst can either be located within specific brain tissues (parenchymal neurocysticercosis) or it can be located outside of these specific tissues (extraparenchymal neurocysticercosis). Extraparenchymal forms include cyst development in the fluid filled regions of the brain (intraventricular cysticercosis), in the space surrounding the brain (subarachnoid cysticercosis), in or around the spinal cord (spinal cysticercosis), and in the eye (ophthalmic cysticercosis). Some forms of subarachnoid cysticercosis are termed racemose cysticercosis and are very rare.
Cysticercosis can affect anyone at any age, but the clinical onset in most patients is between the ages of 10 and 40 years old. Symptoms can appear weeks to years after becoming infected with the eggs of the pork tapeworm (T. solium). Most symptoms appear when the cysts start dying. If the cysts are viable, they can “disguise” themselves from the host’s immune system causing only mild symptoms. Few symptoms can arise directly from the presence of the cyst itself. When cysts die, however, it activates the immune system to react against it, and there is a large inflammatory reaction. This inflammation may cause seizures and headache. Cysts can also block the flow of fluid generated in the brain, resulting in increased pressure, puts pressure on the brain and causes symptoms like headache, nausea, dizziness, altered vision etc.

symptoms:
Symptoms usually appear years after becoming infection with the eggs of the pork tapeworm (T. solium). Symptoms may last for many years if medical treatment is not received.
The symptoms of cysticercosis depend on where the infection is in the body, the cyst burden, and the host’s immune response to the infection. Thus, symptoms vary from case to case. The symptoms described below are categorized based on the location of the infection in the body.
Most people with cysticercosis have nervous system involvement (neurocysticercosis). The symptoms of neurocysticercosis vary and are nonspecific. The symptoms of neurocysticercosis depend on if the cysts are in specific brain tissues (parenchymal neurocysticercosis) or if the cysts are outside of these tissues (extraparenchymal neurocysticercosis). An individual can either have parenchymal or extraparenchymal neurocysticercosis or both forms at the same time. Parenchymal neurocysticercosis is the most common form of cysticercosis, occurring in greater than 60 percent of people. Most individuals with parenchymal neurocysticercosis do not have symptoms (asymptomatic). The most common symptom in parenchymal neurocysticercosis is seizures, occurring in 50-80 percent of individuals with parenchymal neurocysticercosis. Some people may have one seizure, while others may have multiple. Having multiple seizures is more common in individuals who have multiple cysts instead of just one cyst. Headaches are also common and a range of neurologic symptoms can rarely occur.
Rarely, individuals with a high level of exposure can acquire hundreds of cysts in the brain, which leads to an intense immune response, causing intense swelling of the brain (cysticercal encephalitis), which is associated with seizures, mental confusion, headache, nausea and vomiting, and occasional fever. This is usually seen in children or women under 30 years old. Cysticercal encephalitis can occur spontaneously, or as a result of antiparasitic therapy.
Extraparenchymal neurocysticercosis is more common in adults than in children and carries a higher risk for complication or death compared to parenchymal neurocysticercosis, though it is much rarer. Extraparenchymal neurocysticercosis forms include cyst development in the fluid filled regions of the brain (intraventricular cysticercosis), in the space surrounding the brain (subarachnoid cysticercosis), in or around the spinal cord (spinal cysticercosis), and in the eye (ophthalmic cysticercosis). Though the symptoms depend on which form of extraparenchymal neurocysticercosis an individual has, common symptoms to all forms of extraparenchymal neurocysticercosis include altered mental status, and high pressure in the brain (elevated intracranial pressure) due to an accumulation of excessive fluid (cerebrospinal fluid) in the skull (hydrocephalus), which causes headaches, nausea, and vomiting. In some cases, individuals who develop hydrocephalus often, in turn, develop swelling of the optic disc (papilledema). Papilledema may cause blurred or double vision.
Symptoms of intraventricular and subarachnoid cysticercosis include headache, nausea and vomiting, dizziness, altered mental status, altered vision, and, rarely, a constellation of findings involving the eyes, mainly the inability to move the eyes upwards and downwards (Parinaud syndrome). In some cases, subarachnoid cysticercosis can cause swelling of a tissue that surrounds the brain (arachnoiditis), which can lead to neck stiffness, intolerance to bright light, and headache (these three symptoms together are termed meningeal signs), stroke, and hydrocephalus. In a rare form of subarachnoid cysticercosis called racemose cysticercosis, there is an accumulation of cysts at the base of the brain, which could result in mental deterioration, coma, and life-threatening complications.
Spinal cysticercosis is rare and occurs in about 1 percent of patients with cysticercosis. Symptoms include a shooting, burning, numbness, or sense of weakness in a particular area of the body (radicular pain), or an abnormal sensation of tingling or pricking commonly described as “pins and needles” (paresthesia).
Ophthalmic cysticercosis arises when cysts form in the eyes. It occurs in approximately 1 to 3 percent of cysticercosis cases. Many people with ophthalmic cysticercosis are asymptomatic. Symptoms include visual disturbances or vision loss, inflammation in the eye (uveitis), inflammation of the retina (retinitis), limited eye movement, protrusion of the eyeball (proptosis), recurrent eye pain, double vision (diplopia), and symptoms related to the nerve that transmits visual information from the eyes to the brain (optic nerve), such as vision loss in one eye, and/or flashing lights. Rarely, the part of the eye responsible for image formation (retina) can detach (retinal detachment), which can threaten vision and needs to be treated quickly.
If the cysts are located outside the nervous system, in places such as subcutaneous tissue, muscle tissue or heart (cardiac) tissue, then it is called extraneural cysticercosis. Individuals with extraneural cysticercosis usually do not have symptoms (asymptomatic). Occasionally, individuals with subcutaneous cysticercosis may have small hard lumps (nodules) that are painless in the arms and chest. These nodules will become swollen and painful right before they begin to disappear. In rare cases, a very large number of cysts can cause enlarged limbs. Rarely, if there are many cysts within a muscle, muscle weakness (myopathy) can develop. Heart involvement (cardiac cysticerci) is usually asymptomatic, but occasionally, there can be heartbeat abnormalities (arrythmias and/or conduction abnormalities).

