Cystinosis

overview:
Summary
Cystinosis is a rare, multisystem genetic disorder characterized by the accumulation of an amino acid called cystine in different tissues and organs of the body including the kidneys, eyes, muscles, liver, pancreas and brain. The kidneys and eyes are the two organs most often affected. Generally, cystinosis is broken down into three different forms known as nephropathic cystinosis, intermediate cystinosis and non-nephropathic (or ocular) cystinosis, although there is overlap among these arbitrary categories. The age of onset, symptoms and severity of cystinosis can vary greatly from one person to another. Nephropathic cystinosis begins in infancy and is the most common and severe form. Early detection and prompt treatment are critical in slowing the development and progression of symptoms associated with cystinosis. Individuals with nephropathic cystinosis and most people with intermediate cystinosis have ultimately required a kidney transplant. Non-nephropathic cystinosis affects only the corneas of the eyes, although cystine is stored in other tissues to a certain extent. Cystinosis is caused by variants in theCTNSgene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
Introduction
Cystinosis was first described in the medical literature in 1903 by Abderhalden. Cystinosis is classified as a lysosomal storage disorder. Lysosomes are membrane bound compartments within cells that break down nutrients such as fats, proteins and carbohydrates. Lysosomes are the primary digestive unit within cells. Some enzymes within lysosomes break down (metabolize) these nutrients, while other proteins transport the leftover metabolic products (such as cystine) out of the lysosome. In people with cystinosis, the lack of this specific transporter causes cystine to accumulate in lysosomes of cells throughout the body. Cystine forms crystals (crystallizes) in many types of cells and slowly damages affected organs.

symptoms:
At one time, nephropathic cystinosis was fatal at a very young age. However, improvements in kidney transplantation and the development of a medication known as cysteamine (which lowers the levels of cystine in the cells of the body) have transformed cystinosis from a fatal kidney disorder to a chronic, multisystem disorder with a life expectancy well into adulthood.
The specific symptoms and severity of cystinosis vary greatly from one person to another based upon several factors including age of onset and whether the disorder is promptly diagnosed and treated. The progression of the disorder can be slowed by early diagnosis and treatment. Eventually, cystinosis can affect all tissues of the body. The age of onset for different symptoms varies greatly.
It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals and parents of affected children should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
NEPHROPATHIC CYSTINOSISNephropathic, or infantile, cystinosis is the most frequent and most severe form of cystinosis. The symptoms of nephropathic cystinosis usually become apparent within the second half of the first year of life. Specific symptoms can be mild or severe based upon each individual case and the age when treatment is started.
Growth failure and renal Fanconi syndrome (see below) are usually the first noticeable complications of the disorder. Although infants appear normal at birth, by the age of one they generally fall into the third percentile for height and weight. In addition, affected infants may have episodes of vomiting, poor appetite and feeding difficulties that contribute (along with kidney dysfunction) to nutritional deficiency and failure to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive). On average, growth in untreated children with cystinosis is about 60% of the expected rate.
Infants with nephropathic cystinosis develop renal Fanconi syndrome, a rare disorder characterized by kidney dysfunction. The kidneys are two bean-shaped organs located just under the back of the ribcage. The kidneys have several functions, including filtering and excreting waste products from the blood and body, creating certain hormones and helping maintain the balance of certain chemicals in the body such as potassium, sodium, chloride, bicarbonate, calcium, magnesium and other minerals. In nephropathic cystinosis, the kidney tubules fail to reabsorb a variety of needed substances, including the compounds mentioned above as well as amino acids, water, phosphate, glucose, carnitine and certain proteins. Consequently, affected individuals have abnormally low levels of many of these substances in the body.
Symptoms of renal Fanconi syndrome usually become apparent between 6 and 12 months of age and may include excessive thirst (polydipsia), excessive production and passage of urine (polyuria), electrolyte imbalances, vomiting and dehydration with or without fever. Dehydration can be severe in some affected individuals.
The renal Fanconi syndrome can also cause hypophosphatemic rickets. In this disorder, because the kidneys are unable to reabsorb phosphate from the urine, the body leaches phosphate from the bones to maintain blood levels of phosphate; this results in progressive softening and weakening of the bone (rickets). Rickets can cause bone deformity and can delay walking because it is painful. Affected children may walk gingerly. Kidney dysfunction can also cause excessive amounts of calcium to be lost from the body through the urine (hypercalciuric hypocalcemia). Low levels of calcium can cause intermittent muscle spasms (tetany) and, rarely in cystinosis, seizures.
Besides reabsorbing important molecules from the urine, another function of the kidneys is to filter out, or remove, certain compounds. If left untreated, the filtering function of the kidney will continue to deteriorate, eventually progressing to kidney failure at about 10 years of age. Treatment with medications that lower cystine levels can slow or stop the progression of kidney disease and delay the need for a kidney transplant into the teen-age years, the 20s or later. Any existing kidney damage that occurs before diagnosis (and therefore before treatment) is irreversible.
Extrarenal SymptomsChildren with nephropathic cystinosis may also develop symptoms unrelated to the kidneys (extrarenal symptoms). Again, these findings are highly variable, and an affected child will not develop all the symptoms discussed below. Specific extrarenal symptoms vary greatly depending upon the age at which treatment is begun and the specific organs that become involved; organs can include the eyes, bone marrow, liver, pancreas, spleen, intestine, brain, thyroid, muscles and testes.
At any age, children may develop an abnormal sensitivity to light (photophobia) and irritation due to the formation of cystine crystals in the cornea. The severity of photophobia can vary. In some untreated individuals, pain and recurrent corneal erosions may develop.
By the age of 10, about half of affected children have developed deficiency of thyroid hormone production (hypothyroidism) due to cystine accumulation in the thyroid. The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland located at the base of the neck. The thyroid secretes hormones into the bloodstream that influence certain activities of the body such as growth, maturation and the rate of metabolism. Symptoms of hypothyroidism are highly variable, but may include fatigue, feeling cold, dry skin, constipation and depression.
As a group, children with nephropathic cystinosis do not produce normal amounts of tears, sweat or saliva. Tear production may be diminished causing the eyes to dry out. An impaired ability to sweat can potentially cause total exhaustion or collapse due to heat (heat prostration); this is unusual in cystinosis.
Puberty may be delayed by one or two years. Untreated males have hypogonadism, in which the testes produce reduced amounts of testosterone. Testosterone plays a key role in growth and the development of male secondary sexual characteristics during puberty. Males are generally infertile because of cystine accumulation in the testes.
Intelligence is usually normal, although many children experience learning disabilities. Some children may have problems with processing visual information, short-term visual memory, difficulties identifying common objects by touch (tactile recognition) and an inability to visually recognize the spatial relationships among objects (poor visuospatial skills). An example of visuospatial skills is distance and depth perception. Issues with motor speed and sustained attention have also been reported. Some affected children have behavioral and psychosocial issues, which are common in children dealing with chronic illnesses. IQ levels, while in the normal range, may be lower than would be expected based upon the IQ levels of parents and siblings.
Delayed dental development and delayed eruption of permanent teeth can also occur. Some affected individuals may develop increased pressure of cerebrospinal fluid within the brain (intracranial hypertension), which can cause headaches and swelling of the optic disc (papilledema).
Late-Onset AbnormalitiesIndividuals with nephropathic cystinosis are living longer and this has revealed additional complications affecting organs other than the kidneys later in life. These complications develop due to the chronic accumulation of cystine in individuals who have not been adequately treated with cysteamine, although they have had a kidney transplant. These additional complications generally develop between 20 and 40 years of age.
Accumulation of cystine in muscle tissue can cause muscle disease (myopathy) leading to progressive weakness and wasting of affected muscles. This usually begins in the hands and progresses to the arms, shoulders and neck. Impairment of muscles in the throat can lead to swallowing and feeding difficulties. Involvement of chest muscles can result in decreased lung function.
A wide variety of gastrointestinal symptoms can develop including enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly), high blood pressure of the main vein of the liver (portal hypertension), enlargement of the spleen (splenomegaly), gastroesophageal reflux, ulcers, inflammation of the esophagus (esophagitis) and dysfunction of the muscles of the gastrointestinal tract (dysmotility). Unusual additional symptoms include poor fat absorption causing diarrhea and inflammatory bowel disease. Tearing of the bowel causing the contents of the intestines to flow into the abdominal cavity (bowel perforation) and inflammation of the peritoneum (peritonitis), which is the membrane that lines the abdominal wall and organs, can occur, sometimes related to chronic peritoneal dialysis for kidney failure.
High blood pressure (hypertension), coronary artery atherosclerosis and anemia are complications of the renal disease associated with cystinosis.
Additional findings can include metabolic bone disease and an inability to properly digest food due to a lack of digestive enzymes normally produced by the pancreas (pancreatic exocrine insufficiency). Adults with cystinosis may also develop eye abnormalities including spasm of the eyelids (blepharospasm), band keratopathy and pigmentary retinopathy. Band keratopathy refers to the accumulation of calcium deposits in a band across the central surface of the cornea, which can cause pain and decreased clarity of vision (visual acuity). Pigmentary retinopathy is characterized by progressive degeneration of the retina, the thin layer of nerve cells that line the inner surface of the back of the eyes. The retina senses light and converts it to nerve signals, which are then relayed to the brain through the optic nerve. Pigmentary retinopathy can impair night and color vision and, eventually, can contribute to overall reduced clarity of vision.
Although uncommon, brain dysfunction can occur in some older adults with cystinosis. The exact reason this occurs is unknown. Specific symptoms will vary, but some affected individuals may experience a decline in both motor and mental capabilities. In very rare cases, neurological dysfunction can progress to dementia. Brain MRI imaging studies can show atrophy and calcium deposits, but these findings do not usually indicate dysfunction.
Individuals with nephropathic cystinosis have a higher rate of diabetes than the general population because of destruction of the pancreas by cystine accumulation.
INTERMEDIATE CYSTINOSISAlso known as nephropathic juvenile cystinosis or adolescent cystinosis, this form of cystinosis can be characterized by the signs and symptoms of nephropathic cystinosis described above. However, the onset and frequency of these symptoms does not occur until later, perhaps at 8-20 years of age. Generally, the symptoms are less severe than in the classical infantile nephropathic form and have a slower progression. If untreated, end-stage renal failure in intermediate cystinosis usually develops at some point between 15 and 25 years of age. There is a spectrum of disease severity in cystinosis, with overlap of the infantile and intermediate forms.
NON-NEPHROPATHIC CYSTINOSISAlso known as ocular or “benign” cystinosis, this form usually affects adults during middle age; it was once called adult cystinosis. Kidney disease does not occur in these individuals. The disorder appears to affect only the eyes. Untreated individuals with non-nephropathic cystinosis eventually develop photophobia due to cystine crystal accumulation in the eyes.

