Cytochrome C Oxidase Deficiency

synonyms:
complex IV deficiencyCOX deficiencydeficiency of mitochondrial respiratory chain complex IV

overview:
Cytochrome C Oxidase deficiency is a very rare inherited metabolic disorder characterized by deficiency of the enzyme cytochrome C oxidase (COX), or Complex IV, an essential enzyme that is active in the subcellular structures that help to regulate energy production (mitochondria). Deficiency of COX may be limited (localized) to the tissues of the skeletal muscles or may affect several tissues, such as the heart, kidney, liver, brain, and/or connective tissue (fibroblasts); in other cases, the COX deficiency may be generalized (systemic). Four distinct forms of Cytochrome C Oxidase deficiency have been identifed. The first form of this disorder is known as COX deficiency, benign infantile mitochondrial myopathy. Affected infants exhibit many of the same symptoms as those with the more severe infantile form of the disease; however, because the COX deficiency is limited (localized) to tissues of the skeletal muscles, they typically do not have heart or kidney dysfunction.
In the second type of the disease, known as COX deficiency, infantile mitochondrial myopathy, because the COX deficiency affects tissues of the skeletal muscles as well as several other tissues, the disorder may be characterized by a generalized weakness of skeletal muscles (myotonia), abnormalities of the heart and kidneys, and/or abnormally high levels of lactic acid in the blood (lactic acidosis). De Toni-Fanconi-Debre syndrome may also be present and may include excessive thirst, excessive urination, and excessive excretion of glucose, phosphates, amino acids, bicarbonate, calcium and water in the urine.
The third form of COX deficiency, known as Leigh’s disease (subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy), is thought to be a generalized (systemic) form of COX deficiency. Leigh’s disease is characterized by progressive degeneration of the brain and dysfunction of other organs of the body including the heart, kidneys, muscles, and liver. Symptoms may include loss of previously acquired motor skills, loss of appetite, vomiting, irritability, and/or seizure activity. As Leigh’s disease progresses, symptoms may also include generalized weakness; loss of muscle tone (hypotonia); and/or episodes of lactic acidosis.
In the fourth form of COX deficiency, known as COX deficiency French-Canadian type, the COX deficiency affects tissues of the skeletal muscles, connective tissue, and, in particular, the brain (Leigh’s disease) and the liver. Affected infants and children may demonstrate developmental delays, diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), crossing of the eyes (strabismus), Leigh’s disease, and/or episodes of lactic acidosis. Most cases of COX deficiency are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Rarely, COX deficiency occurs as the result of a new or inherited abnormality (mutation) in a mitochondrial gene.

symptoms:
Cytochrome C Oxidase (COX) deficiency is a very rare inherited metabolic disorder characterized by a deficiency of the enzyme cytochrome C oxidase or Complex IV. Cytochrome C oxidase is an essential enzyme that is active in subcellular structures that help to regulate energy production (mitochondria). Four distinct forms of Cytochrome C Oxidase deficiency have been identified. The range and severity of symptoms varies greatly from case to case.
In the first form of this disorder, known as COX deficiency type benign infantile mitochondrial myopathy, deficiency of cytochrome C oxidase may be limited (localized) to the tissues of the skeletal muscles. Therefore, although affected infants may exhibit many of the same symptoms as those associated with the severe infantile form of the disease, the heart and kidneys are not affected. Affected infants with this form of the disorder may experience episodes characterized by the presence of abnormally high levels of lactic acid in the blood (lactic acidosis). If untreated, life-threatening complications (e.g., respiratory failure) may occur. With appropriate, intensive treatment, recovery from this form of COX deficiency may occur spontaneously within the first few years of life.
In the second form of the disorder, COX deficiency type infantile mitochondrial myopathy, deficiency of cytochrome C oxidase affects tissues of the skeletal muscles as well as several other tissues, such as the heart, kidney, liver, brain, and/or connective tissue (fibroblasts). Symptoms associated with this form of the disease typically begin within the first three to four weeks of life. Such symptoms may include generalized muscle weakness as well as heart problems (cardiomyopathy) and kidney dysfunction. Affected infants may also fail to gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive) and/or exhibit a weak cry; difficulties sucking, swallowing, and/or breathing; and/or “floppiness” or poor muscle tone (hypotonia). In addition, infants with COX deficiency may experience episodes of lactic acidosis, possibly leading to impairment of respiratory and kidney function. Other symptoms may result from a specific defect in the kidneys that leads to de Toni-Fanconi-Debre syndrome, a condition that causes kidney dysfunction and involves excessive urinary excretion of glucose, phosphates, amino acids, bicarbonate, calcium, and water. Symptoms due to de Toni-Fanconi-Debre syndrome may include excessive thirst (polydipsia) and excessive urination (polyuria).
Leigh’s disease, also known as subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy, is thought to be a generalized (systemic) form of COX deficiency. This form of the disorder is characterized by progressive degeneration of the brain and dysfunction of other organs of the body including the heart, kidneys, muscles, and/or liver. Symptoms generally begin between three months and two years of age. The most predominant symptoms of Leigh’s disease involve the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system). In most affected infants, the first noticeable signs may include loss of previously acquired motor skills or loss of head control and poor sucking ability. These symptoms may be accompanied by a profound loss of appetite, vomiting, irritability, continuous crying, and/or possible seizure activity. If the onset is later in childhood (i.e., 2 years), affected children may experience difficulty articulating words (dysarthria) and coordinating voluntary movements such as walking or running (ataxia). Previously acquired intellectual skills may diminish and mental retardation may also occur. (For more complete details on this disorder, please see NORD’s disease report on Leigh’s disease. To obtain this information, choose “Leigh” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
In the fourth form of COX deficiency, known as COX deficiency French-Canadian type, deficiency of cytochrome C oxidase affects tissues of the skeletal muscles, connective tissue (fibroblasts), and, in particular, tissues of the brain (Leigh’s disease) and liver. However, tissues of the kidney and heart demonstrate near normal cytochrome C oxidase activity. Affected infants and children may demonstrate developmental delays, diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), slight facial abnormalities (mild facial dysmorphism), Leigh’s disease, crossing of the eyes (strabismus), impaired ability to control voluntary movements (ataxia), fatty accumulation within and degeneration of the liver (microvesicular steatosis), and/or episodes of lactic acidosis, which may lead to life-threatening complications such as respiratory and kidney failure.

