Danon Disease

synonyms:
Antopol diseaseglycogen storage cardiomyopathyglycogen storage disease type IIBGSD IIBlysosomal glycogen storage disease without acid maltase deficiencypseudoglycogenosis IIvacuolar cardiomyopathy and myopathy, X-linked

overview:
Danon disease is a rare genetic disorder characterized by an X-linked dominant inheritance pattern, so males are more severely affected than females. Among boys, the key features are diseased heart muscle (cardiomyopathy), weakness of the body muscles (skeletal myopathy) and intellectual disability ranging from mild learning problems to overt intellectual disability. In many males, the disease progresses until a heart transplant is required or death occurs in the second to third decade of life. Females are also affected, although usually more mildly, and often onset is delayed until they reach adulthood. However, some females will progress to being considered for cardiac transplantation during their second decade of life, similar to what is observed in males. Other features include heart arrhythmias, which can lead to a need for medications or a pacemaker, and eye disease affecting the retina; the retinal disease does not always affect vision, especially early in the disease. Danon disease is not usually evident at birth unless blood tests are done in a suspected case (i.e., a son born to a mother known to have the disease).

symptoms:
Symptoms of Danon disease vary from person to person and depend on gender. Boys usually show early signs of muscle problems (difficulty sitting or walking), and motor skills may be awkward or delayed. Intellectual disability is usually noticed by parents and/or teachers and can be quite mild. The development of heart disease can lead to further fatigue and shortness of breath. Visual complaints are also prevalent with serious color vision disturbances and near-complete loss of retinal pigment in some patients.
In general, young girls may have no symptoms and will report normal muscle strength and have normal intellect. As females age, symptoms of heart disease can begin to develop, and many adult women will experience arrhythmias and may develop progressive heart failure and be considered for cardiac transplantation. Muscle symptoms are reported by some girls and women, but overt findings of frank muscle weakness are usually absent. Visual complaints may also be reported in women and can be an early feature of the disease, although manifestations are less severe than in men.
Clinical researchers believe that the skeletal muscle involvement in Danon disease preferentially involves the muscles of the back, shoulder, upper legs and the neck muscles. These are the proximal muscles; that is, those closest to the center of the body. Symptoms of weakness in these muscles can include back pain and difficulty raising one’s arms over the head, getting out of a chair or walking up steps. In a young boy, these problems may be suggested by problems meeting motor milestones (sitting, crawling, and walking, running). An experienced neurologist can recognize the extent of muscle disease by performing a physical examination. Increasingly it is apparent that for some patients the muscle disease progresses over time and some older males may require assistance devices (walkers, wheelchairs).
The diseased heart muscle (cardiomyopathy) can lead to a thickened, stiff heart (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy) or to an enlarged heart (dilated cardiomyopathy). Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is more common in males (approximately 90% hypertrophic and 10% dilated), whereas females are more apt to show features of dilated cardiomyopathy (approximately 50% hypertrophic and 50% dilated). Sometimes the cardiomyopathy can be the first sign of disease in male children. In both instances, problems with heart function and symptoms of heart failure (shortness of breath, fatigue, fluid gain) can occur. Death from heart disease seems to more occur frequently in males, especially as they reach the second and third decades of life. Heart transplantation has been performed successfully and can greatly improve symptoms and extend life. Implantable cardiac defibrillators are used to manage heart arrhythmias and should probably be considered when arrhythmia and cardiomyopathy develop.
The extent of intellectual disability in affected males has been described in some epidemiological studies. Most boys will be mildly affected cognitively, usually allowing them to achieve the ability to read, hold jobs, form relationships and live independently. Furthermore, providing education and learning support may help some boys improve their intellectual functioning. In women, intellect appears to be normal, although very little information in the literature addresses this question.
Less prevalent symptoms might also include liver and lung involvement, although these have not been studied extensively and might be secondary to muscle involvement (e.g., serum liver enzyme elevation and respiratory muscle weakness). Some speculation also exists on psychiatric disease, with some case reports detailing depression, psychosis, suicidal ideation and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in Danon disease patients. However, it is unclear if psychiatric episodes are related to Danon disease.
Males with Danon disease typically have abnormalities on certain laboratory tests. The creatine kinase (CPK) level in the blood is often elevated and reflects ongoing muscle damage. The CPK is usually elevated in males but is usually normal in females who have Danon disease. Abnormalities in liver enzyme tests are common in males; in some boys, these are mistakenly interpreted as a sign of primary liver disease rather than a reflection of skeletal muscle dysfunction; frank liver dysfunction has not been well-described in Danon disease. The electrocardiogram (ECG), which measures electrical impulses made by the heart, is often abnormal. This abnormality in conduction and electrical impulse is also known as an arrhythmia. Frequently, an arrhythmia called Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, or a pre-excitation syndrome will be seen on the ECG. An examination of the retina by an experienced eye doctor (ophthalmologist) will often detect changes in the pigment of the retina. This can be a useful sign in women, as the retinal changes appear to precede other symptoms of the disease in some females.

