De Barsy Syndrome

synonyms:
autosomal recessive cutis laxa type 3 (ARCL3)corneal clouding-cutis laxa-intellectual disabilityDBSDe Barsy-Moens-Dierckx syndromeprogeroid syndrome of De Barsy

overview:
Summary
De Barsy syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by eye abnormalities, growth retardation, intellectual disability, a prematurely-aged appearance (progeroid features), and loose (lax), wrinkled, sagging, redundant skin that lacks elasticity (cutis laxa). Distinctive facial features, skeletal malformations, and neurological abnormalities can also occur. The specific symptoms present and the severity of de Barsy syndrome can vary greatly from one individual to another. Some cases of de Barsy syndrome have been linked to mutations in either the PYCR1 or ALDH18A1 genes; in other cases, a specific genetic mutation has not yet been identified. De Barsy syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
Introduction
De Barsy syndrome was first reported in the medical literature by Dr. De Barsy in 1968 in one patient. The disorder is now classified as a form of cutis laxa and also known as autosomal recessive cutis laxa type 3. Cutis laxa is a group of rare disorders that may occur in several inherited (congenital) forms or acquired at some point during life (acquired cutis laxa). This group of disorders involves a wide spectrum of symptoms and signs that result from defects in connective tissue, the material between cells of the body that gives the tissue form and strength. Connective tissue is found throughout the body in muscles, joints, skin and other organs. Cutis laxa is characterized by skin that is loose (lax), wrinkled, sagging, redundant, and lacking elasticity (inelastic). When stretched, inelastic skin returns to place abnormally slowly.
Cutis laxa syndromes were once broken down mainly by clinical characteristics, but are now classified based upon the specific mutation present. Consequently, individuals with de Barsy syndrome caused by a PYCR1 mutation are said to have PYCR1-related cutis laxa (autosomal recessive cutis laxa type 3B) and individuals with de Barsy syndrome caused by an ALDH18A1 mutation are said to have ALDH18A1-related cutis laxa (autosomal recessive cutis laxa type 3A). NORD has a general report on cutis laxa that explains the various subtypes and genetics of cutis laxa. For more information, choose “cutis laxa” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.
In ALDH18A1-related de Barsy syndrome, approximately one third of ALDH18A1 mutation carriers show biochemical signs of metabolic disease due to ALDH18A1 related abnormal purine synthesis in blood. Abnormal amino acid levels include variable degrees of decrease in arginine, ornithine, citrulline and sometimes low proline concentrations. Young patients might present with symptoms of elevated levels of ammonia in the blood (hyperammonemia) and secondary urea cycle disturbance. It is extremely important to screen for the specific purine synthesis defect related metabolites in suspected ALDH18A1-related cases. These metabolites are not always abnormal and might show variable degree of abnormalities. Ammonia elevation is usually not exceeding a second fold increase. In case of abnormal results there is a potential dietary and amino acid supplementation therapy.

symptoms:
Although researchers have been able to establish a clear syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about de Barsy syndrome is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified cases, the lack of large clinical studies, and the possibility of other genes influencing the disorder prevent physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Parents should talk to their children’s physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
An extremely wide and varied group of symptoms have been reported in individuals with de Barsy syndrome. The prematurely-aged appearance that commonly affects children with de Barsy syndrome is caused by underdevelopment of the skin and structures in the middle of the face (midface hypoplasia). Loose, sagging, inelastic skin that characterizes cutis laxa contributes to the prematurely-aged appearance. Less often, the skin may be thin and appear translucent so the underlying veins may be easily visible. In some cases, affected individuals may have reduced subcutaneous fat, which is the layer of fat just below the skin’s surface.
Infants with de Barsy syndrome may also have distinctive facial features including an unusually prominent forehead (frontal bossing), thin lips, widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), a small, upturned nose, and large, malformed (dysplastic) ears. Some affected infants may experience delayed closure of the soft spot on top of the skull (delayed closure of the anterior fontanel). The anterior fontanel may be abnormally large as well. In some cases, the circumference of an infant’s or child’s head may be smaller than would be expected based upon age and gender (microcephaly).
Affected infants may also have diminished muscle tone (hypotonia) and joints that are abnormally loose (hypermobility) because of lax ligaments and tendons.  Skeletal abnormalities may occur including frequent dislocations and partial dislocations (subluxations) including congenital dislocation of the hip, and hands that are stuck in a clenched position (contracture) with thumbs that turned inward (adducted thumbs). A sunken breastbone known as pectus excavatum, low bone mineral density, and weakened, fragile bones (osteoporosis) have also been reported.
Ocular abnormalities are also common in de Barsy syndrome and may include clouding of the lenses of the eyes (cataracts) and clouding of the corneas of the eyes (bilateral corneal opacification). The cornea is the clear (transparent) outer layer of the eye that helps let light in. Corneal opacification may not cause any symptoms or it can lead to varying degrees of vision loss. Less common ocular abnormalities include bluish discoloration of the whites of the eyes (blue sclera), nearsightedness (myopia), and eyes that do not line up in the same direction such as crossed-eyes (strabismus).
Varying degrees of intellectual disability may also occur, ranging from moderate to severe. Affected infants and children may experience delays in attaining developmental milestones (developmental delays) and have reflex responses that are stronger than normal (hyperreflexia). As affected individuals grow older they may develop seizures and involuntary, slow, writhing movements (athetoid-like movements) of the hands, feet, arms and legs.
Growth delays occur before birth and after birth (intrauterine and postnatal growth deficiency). In addition, affected infants may fail to grow and gain weight at the expected rate for age and gender (failure to thrive). Individuals with de Barsy syndrome may display height that is below what would normally be expected based upon age and gender (short stature).
Additional symptoms have been reported in some cases including inguinal and umbilical hernias.

