Degos Disease

synonyms:
Degos-Kohlmeier diseaseDegos syndromeKohlmeier-Degos disease / Köhlmeier-Degos diseasemalignant atrophic papulosisMAPpapulosis atrophicans malignaDegos's malignant atrophic papulosisatrophic papulosis, malignantKöhlmeier-Degos-Delort-Tricort syndromeerythrokeratoderma en cocardesgenodermatose en cocardeslethal cutaneous and gastrointestinal arteriolar thrombosis

overview:
Degos disease is an extremely rare disorder, with only about 200 reported cases worldwide. In affected individuals, arteries of smaller diameter become blocked (occlusive arteriopathy), subsequently restricting the flow of blood to affected areas. Degos disease usually presents with characteristic skin lesions (porcelain-white macules) that may persist for several weeks or even years. Degos disease can occur at any age, with onset of symptoms typically between the age of 20 and 50. In most individuals, the symptoms of Degos disease are limited to the skin, termed benign cutaneous Degos disease. This form of the disease has an excellent prognosis.
Other individuals will develop additional symptoms that affect multiple organ systems, in which the disease is then termed systemic Degos disease. Systemic Degos disease can develop suddenly or several years following the development of the benign cutaneous type. Degos disease has a potentially life-threatening prognosis: a 50% risk of death within 2-3 years of symptom emergence. In addition to dermal atrophy, systemic Degos disease is most frequently characterized by lesions in the small intestine, and, less often, other portions of the gastrointestinal tract. Some of these lesions may ultimately perforate. Major symptoms prior to perforation include abdominal pain, diarrhea and/or weight loss. This systemic form of Degos disease can lead to other disabling and potentially life-threatening complications if the central nervous system, heart, or lung are involved.
Researchers caution that statistics concerning Degos disease may be inaccurate. Because of its rarity, many affected individuals go undiagnosed. Furthermore, medical reports disproportionately discuss the more serious, systemic form of the disease. It is important to note that about two-thirds of all patients only develop non-life-threatening skin lesions. In addition, recent advances in drug therapy have dramatically improved the potential for recovery of even those severely afflicted by the systemic form of the disease. Most cases reported in the literature were published when no effective treatment option was available. Affected individuals should talk to their physicians and medical team about their specific case and associated symptoms.

symptoms:
In most people, the initial sign of Degos disease is the development of skin lesions which evolve to a very distinct appearance (see below). Affected individuals develop small, elevated bumps or spots (papules) of varying shapes, typically appearing on the trunk, upper arms and upper legs. At onset, only a few lesions may be present, but over time, the skin often continues to develop lesions, so that ultimately hundreds may appear. The palms of the hands, soles of the feet and face are usually not affected so that lesions may not be apparent to others. Over a period of weeks to months, the lesions typically transition from reddish or pink bumps to flat or depressed porcelain-white lesions with a red rim.
In some people, blood vessels of other organ systems are also affected (systemic Degos disease), resulting in serious and potentially life-threatening complications. Individuals who develop systemic Degos disease will not necessarily (and usually does not) develop all the symptoms discussed below.
The most common internal organ affected by systemic Degos disease is the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Gastrointestinal involvement may present anywhere from a few weeks to a few years after the skin lesions develop. In extremely rare cases, gastrointestinal involvement may precede the development of skin lesions.
Due to the occlusion (blockage) of blood vessels and restricted blood flow present in Degos disease, lesions can form in the small intestines, resulting in abdominal pain, cramping, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, bloating, constipation, internal bleeding (hemorrhage) and the passing of blood with bowel movements or vomiting blood. Some affected individuals may experience weakness, fatigue and weight loss from malabsorption of nutrients in the small intestine. The intestinal lesions can tear or rupture (perforate), causing the contents of the intestines to leak into the abdominal cavity (intestinal fistula). This results in inflammation of the membranes lining the abdominal cavity (peritonitis), which is a life-threatening complication and the most common cause of death in Degos patients.
Some individuals with systemic Degos disease experience involvement of the central nervous system (CNS). Symptoms of CNS involvement vary depending upon the specific areas affected but may include headaches, dizziness (vertigo), seizures, paralysis (palsy) of cranial nerves, weakness of one side of the body (hemiparesis), ischemic strokes and damage to small areas of cells in the brain due to blocked arteries (cerebral infarcts). Nonspecific neurological symptoms such as memory loss, difficulty communicating (aphasia), pain insensitivity and altered sensations may also occur. CNS involvement Degos disease nearly always indicates severe disease and poor prognosis.
In rare cases, additional organ systems that may become involved include the eyes, heart, lungs and bladder. When the eyes are affected, individuals may develop double vision (diplopia), drooping of the eyelids (ptosis), clouding of the lenses of the eyes (cataracts), atrophy of the optic nerve, swelling of the optic nerve (papilledema), partial loss of the field of vision (visual-field defects) and blindness caused by lack of blood flow to the eyes (amaurosis fugax).
When the heart is affected, individuals may develop weakness, shortness of breath upon exertion and chest pain. In some cases, inflammation of the sac-like membrane surrounding the heart (pericardium) may occur. This may develop into permanent thickening, resulting in scarring and contracture of the pericardium (constrictive pericarditis).
Inflammation of the membranes lining the lungs (pleuritis) and fluid collection around the lungs (pleural effusion) has also been reported. Respiratory failure can eventually occur.
Copyright 2023 ACR

