Dejerine-Sottas Syndrome

synonyms:
hereditary motor sensory neuropathy type III, HSMN type IIICharcot-Marie-Tooth disease, type 3CMT3DSShypertrophic neuropathy of Dejerine-Sottas

overview:
Summary
Dejerine-Sottas syndrome (DSS) is an inherited neurological condition that gradually affects the ability to move. Peripheral nerves are the nerves outside of the brain and spinal cord. These nerves become enlarged or thickened leading to muscle weakness. The condition may progress irregularly and can often be accompanied by pain, weakness, numbness, and a tingling, prickling or burning sensation in the legs. DSS can result in the inability to walk but is not thought to shorten lifespan. This condition does not impact brain function.
Introduction
DSS is a historical name for a type of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT3). This terminology was used to describe patients with an early onset form of CMT with a marked breakdown (demyelination) of the protective sheath around the long nerves, exposing and endangering the nerves. The availability of genetic testing has resulted in most types of CMT being renamed based on associations with specific genes, but Dejerine-Sottas syndrome is still sometimes used to describe the condition. DSS has also been described as a type of hereditary motor sensory neuropathy (HMSN3) which are rare genetic nerve disorders that impact movement.

symptoms:
DSS often begins suddenly by age two. Tingling, prickling or burning sensations are usually the first symptoms. Muscle weakness is usually first noticed in the back of the leg. This then spreads to the front leg muscles. Children may have delayed motor milestones, including walking at preschool age or later. Some individuals may need to use a wheelchair by their teenage years. The hand and forearm muscles may become weak as the condition worsens. Individuals with DSS may have respiratory insufficiency, meaning they do not take in enough oxygen or breathe out enough carbon dioxide. Mild vision difficulties may also occur. Other symptoms include pain, loss of heat sensitivity, absence of reflexes, muscle loss (atrophy) of leg muscles, scoliosis (curving of the spine), and ataxia (loss of coordination and balance). Symptoms can vary among individuals diagnosed with DSS.

