Dengue Fever

synonyms:
denguedengue virusbreakbone feverdandy fever

overview:
Summary
Dengue fever is a virus transmitted by the bite of a female Aedes mosquito (Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus) carrying dengue virus. The infection is caused by one of four dengue viruses (DENV 1-4).These mosquitos also spread Zika, chikungunya and other viruses. More than half of the world population is at risk of dengue. Dengue outbreaks are occurring in many countries of the world including Latin America, the Caribbean and Southeast Asia. Asia accounts for 75% of the dengue disease burden, followed by Latin America and Africa. Each year, about 58 million people get sick from a dengue infection and 13,500 die from it.
Dengue fever is an acute viral infection characterized by fever and flu-like symptoms. Presentation varies ranging from no symptoms to a mild fever to a life-threatening shock and/or hemorrhage syndrome. Approximately 75% of individuals infected do not show any symptoms. Those who do show symptoms most commonly present with a mild to moderate, nonspecific fever 3-10 days after the bite of the infected mosquito. Other common symptoms along with the fever include a skin rash, severe headache, pain behind the eyes, in the muscles and joints. For many affected individuals, the disease is self-limited, ending with full recovery after symptoms resolve in 5-7 days.
Up to 5% of all dengue affected individuals develop severe, life-threatening disease. Warning signs of progression to severe dengue include persistent vomiting, severe abdominal pain, rapid breathing, extreme fatigue, bleeding gums and a drop in blood pressure with position change.
There are no specific medications for dengue and affected individuals are advised to stay well hydrated and control their fever with acetaminophen and tepid sponge baths. There are no medications to prevent dengue and travelers in endemic areas (high risk areas) are advised to avoid mosquito bites by staying indoors, wearing long clothing that cover their arm and legs, using bed nets and insect repellants.
From 1975 to 2009, symptomatic dengue virus infections were classified according to the World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines as dengue fever, dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF), and dengue shock syndrome (the most severe form of DHF). In 2009, the WHO issued a new guideline that classified cases as:
dengue without warning signsdengue with warning signssevere dengue
Introduction
Dengue infection is caused by one of four dengue viruses (DENV 1-4). Being infected from one dengue virus does not protect a person from the others. A primary dengue infection is when an individual is infected with the virus for the first time; a secondary infection is when the same individual is infected a second time with a different dengue virus. If the secondary dengue infection is more than 2 years after the primary infection, there is a higher risk of developing severe symptoms.
Individuals with suspected dengue should seek help from a healthcare provider for early recognition of warning signs and prompt initiation of aggressive therapy when necessary.
Severe dengue (previously known as dengue hemorrhagic fever) was first recognized in the 1950s during dengue epidemics in the Philippines and Thailand. Today it affects over a hundred countries and has become one of the leading causes of hospitalization among individuals in these regions.

symptoms:
Dengue has a wide clinical spectrum with some individuals showing no symptoms, while others show mild symptoms to severe symptoms. The incubation period is a period between being infected with the virus to appearance of the first symptoms and for dengue it lasts 3-10 days. Approximately 25% experience a self-limited febrile illness, accompanied by mild-to-moderate haematological and biochemical abnormalities. Clinically relevant complications develop in a small proportion of these patients, including a systemic vascular leak syndrome, coagulation abnormalities that can be associated with bleeding, and organ involvement, typically hepatic or neurological. However, although these severe complications are infrequent the spectrum of clinical manifestations is broad. The most important risk factor for severe dengue is a prior dengue infection. The risk of developing severe dengue is greatest after a secondary infection with a different infecting type of dengue virus.
The three classifications recommended by WHO are (1) dengue without warning signs, (2) dengue with warning signs and (3) severe dengue
Dengue without warning signs: if an individual resides in or has traveled to an endemic area and has fever with any of the following:Headache, eye painNausea, vomitingMuscle and joint painMaculopapular rash (flat or raised skin rash) over the face, chest, abdomen and arms/legsAches and pains (eye pain, typically behind the eyes, muscle joint or bone pain)
For many affected individuals, the disease is self-limited, ending with full recovery after symptoms resolves in 5-7 days.
Dengue with warning signs of severe dengue: at day 3-7 after symptom onset, a small portion of symptoms do not resolve and progress to any of the following:Severe abdominal painPersistent vomitingExtreme fatigue or restlessnessSpontaneous bleeding in the mucosa (ex: gums)Vomiting bloodRapid breathing
When these warning signs are seen, the affected individual should be rushed to the emergency room or to the closest health care provider.
Severe dengue:Severe bleedingSevere organ impairment (organ failure, impaired consciousness)Severe plasma leakage from the blood vessels leading to a drop in blood pressure and/or fluid accumulating outside the blood vessels

