Dent Disease

overview:
Summary
Dent disease is a rare genetic kidney disorder characterized by spillage of small proteins in the urine, increased levels of calcium in the urine, kidney calcifications (nephrocalcinosis), recurrent episodes of kidney stones (nephrolithiasis) and chronic kidney disease. Dent disease affects males almost exclusively. Symptoms usually appear during childhood, but some individuals may be undiagnosed well into adulthood. In some cases, the disorder may progressively worsen causing chronic kidney disease; in other cases affected individuals only experience mild or moderate disease into old age. Kidney disease can progressively worsen until the kidneys stop functioning (renal failure), although this usually does not occur until 30 to 50 years of age or later and will not occur at all in some individuals. Dent disease can be broken down into two subtypes. Dent disease type 1 is characterized by the previously-mentioned kidney symptoms. Dent disease type 2 is characterized by the same kidney symptoms, but individuals may have additional symptoms including mild intellectual disability, eye involvement or diminished muscle tone (hypotonia). Dent disease type 1 is caused by changes (mutations) in theCLCN5gene. Dent disease type 2 is caused by mutations in theOCRL1gene. Both of these genes are located on the X chromosome. These mutations may be inherited or occur randomly with no previous family history of the disorder (spontaneously). Dent disease is fully expressed only in males, although some females who carry the gene may develop mild manifestations such as spillage of small proteins in the urine, increased levels of calcium in the urine, or rarely kidney stones.
Introduction
Dent disease was first reported in the medical literature in 1964 by Drs. Dent and Friedman who described two unrelated boys with rickets. The disorder was eventually fully described by Dr. Oliver Wrong in 1990 who named the disease after his colleague and mentor Dr. Dent. Over the years Dent disease was referred to by other names including X-linked recessive nephrolithiasis with renal failure, X-linked recessive hypercalciuric hypophosphatemic rickets, and idiopathic low-molecular-weight proteinuria with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis. Generally, Dent disease is now broken into type 1 and type 2 based upon the specific genetic mutation present. There are other individuals with Dent disease who lack known mutations of these two genes (non 1/ non 2).

symptoms:
The specific symptoms and severity of Dent disease can vary dramatically, even among individuals within the same family. Although researchers have been able to establish a clear syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about these disorders is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified cases, the lack of large clinical studies, and the possibility of other genes influencing the disorders prevent physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis.
Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Parents should talk to their children’s physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
Common symptoms associated with Dent disease include elevated levels of proteins and calcium in the urine (proteinuria and hypercalciuria). The type of proteinuria seen in Dent disease is known as low-molecular-weight proteinuria, which is a characteristic finding of the disorder and not always detected in routine medical testing. Hypercalciuria and low molecular weight proteinuria may be the only symptoms that develop in some people.
Affected individuals may also develop calcium deposits or calcifications in the kidney tissue (nephrocalcinosis) and/or experience recurrent episodes of kidney stone formation. Kidney stones can cause various symptoms including blood in the urine (hematuria), painful urination (dysuria), the urge to urinate often, abdominal pain (renal colic), blockage of the urinary tract, and repeated urinary tract infections. Eventually, the disorder can progress to cause chronic kidney disease with a progressive decline in kidney function. Symptoms associated with very advanced chronic kidney disease include loss of appetite, unintended weight loss, fatigue, and anemia. In some cases, sometimes as early as 30-50 years old, affected individuals can develop kidney failure and require dialysis or kidney transplantation.
Some individuals with Dent disease may also develop bone disease such as softening of the bones (osteomalacia) and hypophosphatemic rickets, a condition caused by impaired transport of phosphate and altered vitamin D metabolism in the kidneys. In children, rickets is characterized by bowing deformity of the legs, as well as, growth plate abnormalities and progressive softening of the bones (called  osteomalacia). . In children, growth rates may be slower than normal, frequently resulting in mild short stature. Children may also experience bone pain and difficulty walking. Because of bone abnormalities, both children and adults may have an increased risk of fractures.
Some individuals with Dent disease have developed vitamin A deficiency, which can lead to impaired night vision and dry eyes (xerophthalmia). This can be corrected by vitamin A supplementation.
DENT DISEASE TYPE 2Dent disease type 2 is characterized by the same symptoms associated with Dent disease type 1. However, some affected individuals have developed additional symptoms including mild intellectual disability, hypotonia, and clouding of the lenses of the eyes (cataracts). Cataracts in Dent disease type 2 are classified as subclinical because they do not impair vision.
Dent disease type 2 is caused by mutations in the same gene that causes Lowe syndrome, a rare multisystem disorder. Lowe syndrome is characterized by the kidney abnormalities that occur in Dent disease, but also additional findings affecting the eyes, brain and other organ systems. Some researchers believe that Dent disease type 2 represents the mild end of a disease spectrum that includes Lowe syndrome at the severe end. (For more information on Lowe syndrome, see the Related Disorders section of this report).
FEMALE CARRIERSSome females who inherited one of the mutations that cause Dent disease may develop mild manifestations of the disorder such as low-molecular-weight proteinuria and/or hypercalciuria. Kidney stones may be more common in female carriers, reported in 6 out of 14 Dent 1 mothers in one recent series. However, only one affected female has been reported in the literature to date whose disease progressed to kidney failure, however she did not have genetic testing to confirm the disease.

