Dentin Dysplasia Type II

synonyms:
coronal dentin dysplasiaDD-II

overview:
Summary
Dentin dysplasia type II, also known as coronal dentin dysplasia, is a rare genetic disorder that affects the teeth. It is characterized by abnormal development (dysplasia) of dentin. Dentin is the hard tissue found beneath the enamel that surrounds and protects the pulp and forms the major part of teeth. Affected children may have brownish-blue discoloration of baby teeth (primary or deciduous teeth) and obliteration of the pulp chambers. Permanent teeth are usually unaffected or only mildly affected. Dentin dysplasia type II only affects the teeth. The disorder is caused by changes (variants) in theDSPPgene.
Introduction
Dentin dysplasia type II belongs to a group of disorders known as the hereditary dentin disorders. In 1973, a physician and his colleagues defined five disorders characterized by inherited dentin defects (Shields classification). Genetic research has discovered that variants inDSPPcause dentinogenesis imperfecta (DGI) types II and III as well as dentin dysplasia (DD) type II; however, the types of variants only fall into 2 groups: 1) variants affecting the N-terminus and protein targeting and 2) frameshift variants into the –1 reading frame in the C-terminal repeat sequence region. The recently revised Shields classification is based upon genetic testing.DSPPN-terminal variants are designated as DGI-III, while C-terminal frameshifts as DGI-II. If the dental features (phenotype) is mild, the dentist receiving the genetics report can change the designation to DD-II.

symptoms:
Dentin dysplasia type II is a dental abnormality characterized by abnormal development (dysplasia) of dentin. Within the interior of a tooth is pulp – a specialized tissue that contains nerves, blood vessels and lymphatic vessels. Pulp is surrounded by a hard dental tissue known as dentin, which forms the primary material of the tooth. The exposed region of the tooth above the gum (also known as the crown or “coronal region”) is covered by enamel, which is harder than dentin, while the root is covered by a bone-like rigid connective tissue known as cementum. Dentin protects the pulp chamber and provides support for enamel and cementum.
In individuals with dentin dysplasia type II, the baby teeth may be discolored and appear to be yellow, brown, grey-amber or a brownish-blue color. The teeth are sometimes described as having a translucent “opalescence”. (Opalescence refers to a milky, opal-like display of colors in reflected light.) In most people, the permanent (secondary) teeth have a normal color.
When the dentin layer beneath the enamel crown is too weak to support it, the enamel will tend to wear away (abrade) and fall out prematurely.
In addition to being normal in color, permanent teeth are also normal in shape and size. However, they also have characteristic abnormalities of the pulp chambers. More specifically, on dental x-rays, pulp chambers appear unusually “flame shaped” and often have abnormal extensions toward the roots (i.e., “thistle-tube” shaped pulp chambers). In addition, the pulp chambers often contain numerous pulp stones, which are abnormal deposits of calcium salts (calcifications). With age, the pulp chambers of the permanent teeth may become partially obliterated. Evidence suggests that root formation in the permanent teeth is usually normal.
In rare cases, some individuals with dentin dysplasia type II may develop mild tooth discoloration or abnormally rounded (bulbous) crowns. If these abnormalities are pronounced in the permanent teeth, then the diagnosis changes to dentinogenesis imperfecta type II (DGI-II).

