Dermatomyositis

synonyms:
ADMchildhood dermatomyositisidiopathic inflammatory myopathyIIMpolymyositis

overview:
Summary

Dermatomyositis is a type of inflammatory myopathy characterized by inflammatory and degenerative changes of the muscles and skin. Associated symptoms and physical findings may vary widely from case to case as patients may present differently. Muscle abnormalities may begin with aches and weakness of the muscles of the trunk, upper arms, hips, and thighs (proximal muscles). Muscles may be stiff, sore, tender and, eventually, show signs of degeneration (atrophy). Affected individuals may experience difficulty in performing certain functions, such as raising their arms and/or climbing stairs or develop speech and swallowing difficulties. Skin abnormalities associated with dermatomyositis often include a distinctive reddish-purple rash (heliotrope rash) on the upper eyelid or across the cheeks and bridge of the nose in a “butterfly” distribution and on the forehead and scalp. Other characteristic rashes include scaling and redness of the knuckles, elbows, knees, and/or other extensor regions (Gottron papules and sign); an abnormal accumulation of fluid (edema) in body tissues surrounding the eyes; and/or other features. The symptoms of childhood (juvenile) dermatomyositis (JDM) are similar to those associated with the adult form of the disorder. However, onset is usually more sudden. In addition, abnormal accumulations of calcium deposits (calcifications) in muscle and skin tissues as well as involvement of the digestive (gastrointestinal [GI]) tract are more common in JDM.

Introduction

The inflammatory myopathies are a group of diseases that involve chronic muscle inflammation and weakness. They are thought to be autoimmune diseases, meaning the body’s natural defenses (antibodies, lymphocytes, etc.) against invading organisms suddenly begin to attack perfectly healthy tissue for unknown reasons, leading to inflammation or swelling.

symptoms:
In those with dermatomyositis, the onset of symptoms may be gradual (insidious) or sudden (acute). The symptoms often wax and wane for no apparent reason.
The major symptom of the disorder is muscle weakness, most often affecting the trunk and muscles closest to the trunk (i.e., proximal muscles), such as the hips, thighs, shoulders, upper arms, and neck. The affected muscles may be stiff, sore, and/or tender and, eventually, may show signs of degeneration and muscle wasting (atrophy). Muscle weakness and degeneration progress and may lead to an awkward manner of walking (gait) and a gradual inability to perform certain tasks, such as lifting the arms, climbing steps, or dressing. Characteristic signs may include an inability to raise the head from the pillow when lying down or to rise unassisted from the floor. In some people with the disorder, involvement of muscles of the neck, tongue, and/or throat may eventually result in difficulties swallowing (dysphagia) and/or articulating speech (dysphonia). In rare cases, weakening of muscles of the chest wall and diaphragm may cause respiratory difficulties, potentially leading to life-threatening complications without prompt, appropriate treatment. In addition, in some with chronic, long-term disease, certain joints may become fixed in a permanently bent (flexed) position (contractures) and lead to problems in walking.
Individuals with dermatomyositis also develop characteristic skin changes that, in some cases, may precede muscle weakness. These characteristic skin changes may be the only sign of dermatomyositis at the start in up to 40% of people. Skin abnormalities often include a distinctive reddish-purple or lilac (i.e., heliotrope) rash that may be present on the upper eyelids (heliotrope eyelids); the forehead; the cheeks and bridge of the nose (“butterfly rash”); and/or other regions. In addition, affected skin on the extensor surfaces of certain joints, such as the knuckles, elbows, knees, or other regions, may tend to become scaly, with central areas of tissue loss (atrophy) that lack or have increased pigmentation (Gottron sign). A “dusky” reddish (erythematous) rash may also develop on the upper arms, upper legs, and upper trunk. The rash tends to be itchy and can lead to trouble sleeping for many people. Although the skin rashes frequently fade completely, they may be followed by brownish discolorations (hyperpigmentation) of the skin, atrophy, scarring, and/or loss of color (depigmentation) of patches of skin (vitiligo). Dermatomyositis may also be associated with distinctive changes of the nails that can include: bluish-red, scaling lesions around the base of the nails; reddish “shininess” of the nail folds; abnormal widening (dilation) of capillaries of the nailbeds; or other findings. Additional skin manifestations may include an abnormal accumulation of fluid in body tissues (edema) surrounding the eyes (periorbital area) and in other facial regions; an increased sensitivity to light (photosensitivity); and/or other findings. In some cases of long-term chronic disease, atrophic changes may result in binding of skin to underlying tissue structures. Some affected individuals, particularly children, may also have abnormal accumulations of calcium deposits (calcinosis) in affected muscles and tissues under the skin (subcutaneous tissues), potentially leading to contractures and localized muscle atrophy. Itching and scaling lesions may develop on the scalp leading to significant hair loss.
Some individuals with dermatomyositis may also develop symptoms such as low-grade fever, a general feeling of ill health (malaise), shortness of breath (dyspnea), pain in multiple joints (polyarthralgia), weight loss, and/or other abnormalities. In some cases, affected individuals, particularly those who have muscle inflammation (myositis) in association with other connective tissue disorders, experience Raynaud phenomenon. This is a condition in which sudden contraction of blood vessels supplying the fingers and toes (digits) causes a temporary interruption of blood flow and associated numbness, tingling, abnormal discoloration of the digits, and pain. Episodes are most commonly triggered by exposure to cold temperatures. (For more information, choose “Raynaud” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database).
Muscle weakness and impairment may progress to affect other areas of the body, including muscles of the GI tract, within the cardiovascular system (i.e., heart, blood vessels, and blood circulation), and/or the lungs. In rare cases the heart muscle may weaken (cardiomyopathy) or irregularity of the heartbeat can occur (arrhythmias). Inflammation of the lung tissue (interstitial pneumonitis or interstitial lung disease) can result in breathing difficulties (dyspnea) and coughing. Some studies have shown plaque accumulation in the arteries (atherosclerosis) in people with dermatomyositis.
Furthermore, in some individuals with dermatomyositis, there may be an association with an underlying cancer (malignancy). Reports indicate that the malignancy may precede, occur in association with, or develop subsequent to the onset of dermatomyositis. Malignancy-associated dermatomyositis appears to occur more frequently in individuals over the age 40-50. Although there is no characteristic cancer site or type, experts indicate that underlying malignancies most commonly arise in the GI tract, lungs, breast, ovary, testis, or certain white blood cells (lymphocytes) or lymphoid tissue (i.e., certain lymphomas and leukemias, multiple myeloma). The relationship between dermatomyositis and malignancies is not fully understood.
The symptoms and physical findings associated with childhood dermatomyositis are similar to those observed in adult dermatomyositis. Onset is usually more sudden (acute) than in the adult form and often involves skin manifestations followed by muscle weakness. Calcification of muscles and tissues is more frequent and widespread in childhood dermatomyositis as compared to adult forms. The deposits have a high calcium content and tend to be firm, white, or flesh-colored nodules over bony areas which can include the elbows, knees, and extremities. These calcifications often develop within three years of diagnosis but may develop up to 20 years later. Affected children also tend to have widespread inflammation of blood vessels (vasculitis), with more frequent involvement of the GI tract. In those with GI vasculitis, associated findings may include abdominal pain; difficult, infrequent, or incomplete passing of stools (constipation); or the passage of tarry, black stools (melena) or vomiting of blood due to the development of sores or eroded areas in the lining of the GI tract (bleeding peptic ulcers). Children may also develop a tiptoe gait secondary to a stiffening of the ankles. Malignancy is rarely associated with the childhood form of dermatomyositis.
In rare cases known as dermatomyositis sine myositis, the skin abnormalities associated with dermatomyositis may occur without the associated muscle abnormalities.

