Diamond Blackfan Anemia

synonyms:
Aase-Smith II SyndromeAase Syndromeanemia, congenital erythroid hypoplasticanemia, congenital pure red cellaplasia, congenital pure red cellcongenital hypoplastic anemiacongenital PRCABlackfan-Diamond anemiaerythrogenesis imperfectahypoplastic congenital anemiainherited erythroblastopeniaDBA

overview:
Diamond Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a rare blood disorder that affects the bone marrow. The function of the bone marrow is to make new blood cells, including red blood cells (which carry oxygen to the body’s tissues), white blood cells (which help the body fight infections), and platelets (which help the body stop bleeding). In DBA the bone marrow cannot make enough red blood cells to meet the body’s needs. DBA is characterized by a shortage of red blood cells which usually becomes evident during the first year of life when the patient develops anemia. About half of the affected patients have abnormal physical abnormalities associated with DBA. The symptoms and physical findings associated with DBA vary greatly from person to person.

symptoms:
Diamond Blackfan anemia is characterized by moderate to severe deficiency of red blood cells (anemia). Sometimes white blood cells and platelets may be lower as well. Symptoms of anemia include rapid heartbeat, pale skin, sleepiness, irritability, poor appetite, and weakness. Approximately ninety percent of affected patients are diagnosed within the first year of life. The diagnosis is generally made by 3-4 months of age.
Approximately one-half of those affected have physical abnormalities, such as small head size; wide-set eyes; flat nose; small, low-set ears; small bottom jaw; recessed or small chin; cleft palate (an opening in the roof of the mouth with or without a cleft lip – a split in the upper lip); and small, missing or extra thumb(s). The neck may be short due to fused vertebrae and shoulder blades may be prominent. About one-third of affected individuals have slow growth leading to short stature.
Other features of DBA may include eye problems such as clouding of the lens of the eyes (cataracts), increased pressure in the eyes (glaucoma), kidney abnormalities; defects of the heart; and males may have hypospadias (a condition in which the urinary tract does not end at the tip of the penis). Many of these defects may need surgical correction.
A possible complication of DBA is the development of cancer at younger than expected ages. Patients with DBA have developed bone cancer (osteosarcoma), colon cancer, and leukemia (blood cancer called acute myeloid leukemia), among others. The patients are also at risk for a pre-leukemic syndrome called myelodysplastic syndrome which is another disorder caused by the bone marrow not making enough healthy blood cells.

