Diencephalic Syndrome

synonyms:
diencephalic syndrome of childhooddiencephalic syndrome of emaciationparamedian diencephalic syndromeRussell's diencephalic cachexiaRussell's syndrome

overview:
Diencephalic syndrome is a rare disorder caused by a tumor that is usually located in the diencephalon, a portion of the brain just above the brainstem. The diencephalon includes the hypothalamus and the thalamus. Affected infants and young children may develop symptoms that include the failure to gain weight and grow as would be expected based upon age and gender (failure to thrive) and abnormal progressive thinness and weakness (emaciation). Affected infants and children may behave in an alert, happy and outgoing manner, which contrasts with their physical appearance. However, more frequently, infants and young children are irritable. Additional symptoms such as vomiting, vision abnormalities, nystagmus, headaches and pallor can also develop. Diencephalic syndrome can progress to cause severe, life-threatening complications. Diencephalic syndrome is treated by surgery, radiation, chemotherapy and/or molecular-targeted therapy. The reason for the development of the tumor that causes diencephalic syndrome is unknown. Diencephalic syndrome was first described in the medical literature in 1951 by Dr. Russell.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms and severity of diencephalic syndrome can vary from one person to another. The disorder can potentially cause severe, even life-threatening complications. Onset is usually in infancy or early childhood. Usually, there is a period of normal development and weight gain, followed by a prolonged period of failure to gain weight and weight loss.
The most striking feature of diencephalic syndrome is profound emaciation including a uniform loss of body fat (adipose tissue). Emaciation occurs despite normal or near normal caloric intake. Emaciation may progressively worsen. Because of the loss of body fat, affected children may appear muscular. Although weight is affected, length (linear growth) may be normal. Emaciation and failure to thrive may occur following an initial period of normal growth.
Although overall development is slowed, neurological development may be normal. However, detailed neurologic examination often discloses subtle abnormalities. Affected children are usually mentally alert. Some children are overactive and restless (hyperkinesia); others are happy and outgoing, which is not in keeping with their outward appearance. Some affected children are described as intensely excited or happy (euphoric). Others may, in contrast, act irritable.
Rapid, involuntary, “jerky” movements of the eyes (nystagmus) can be seen in children with diencephalic syndrome. Nystagmus is a notable feature of this disorder but does not occur in all patients. It may affect one or both eyes. Additional nonspecific symptoms include pallor, vomiting (emesis) and headaches. Degeneration of the nerve that transmits visual stimuli from the eyes to the brain (optic nerve) may also occur (optic atrophy). Vision loss can potentially occur in some patients.
Some affected infants and children develop hydrocephalus, a condition in which excessive cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the skull causes pressure on the brain, resulting in a variety of symptoms including a head that appears large in comparison to the rest of the body, swelling of the optic disk (papilledema).
Less often, additional symptoms have been reported including low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis) and high blood pressure (hypertension). In rare instances, disproportionately large hands and feet have developed.

