Diffuse Pulmonary Lymphangiomatosis

synonyms:
DPLpulmonary lymphangiomatosis

overview:
Summary
Diffuse pulmonary lymphangiomatosis (DPL) is a disease in which the overgrowth (proliferation) of lymphatic vessels (lymphangiomatosis) occurs in the lungs, pleura and typically the surrounding soft tissue of the chest (mediastinum). Lymphatic vessels are part of the lymphatic system, which includes lymph nodes, the small nodules where certain white blood cells (lymphocytes) and other cells participate in the immune regulatory system of the body. When fluid leaves arteries and enters the soft tissue and organs of the body, it does so without red or white blood cells. This thin watery fluid is known as lymph. The lymphatic system consists of a network of tubular channels (lymph vessels) that transport lymph back into the bloodstream. Lymph accumulates between tissue cells and contains proteins, fats, and lymphocytes. As lymph moves through the lymphatic system, it passes through the network of lymph nodes that help the body to deactivate sources of infection (e.g., viruses, bacteria, etc.) and other potentially injurious substances and toxins. Groups of lymph nodes are located throughout the body, including in the neck, under the arms (axillae), at the elbows, and in the chest, abdomen and groin. The lymphatic system also includes the spleen, which filters worn-out red blood cells and produces lymphocytes; and bone marrow, which is the spongy tissue inside the cavities of bones that manufactures blood cells.
Lymphangiomatosis can potentially affect any part of the body except the brain. The disorder can be widespread, affecting multiple areas simultaneously, or be isolated to one area (e.g. the lungs and chest). The specific symptoms and severity vary, depending in part upon the size and the specific location of the abnormalities. Diffuse pulmonary lymphangiomatosis causes functional impairment of the lungs and when the chest wall is involved, may be associated with disfigurement. The exact cause of diffuse pulmonary lymphangiomatosis is unknown.

Introduction
There is a lack of consensus among the medical community as to the proper terminology for disorders and malformations associated with lymphatics. In general, however, a lymphangioma is a relatively localized collection of abnormal lymphatic vessels, lymphangiectasis refers to dilatation of lymphatics and lymphangiomatosis refers to an increase in lymphatic number. In some patients there is overlap between these and so exact classification becomes challenging. Lymphangiomatosis may also occur in association with better-characterized diseases such as Gorham’s disease. Gorham’s disease is a form of lymphangiomatosis in which the lymphatics proliferate in bone, resulting in progressive bone loss. Another disease, which has a similar sounding name, is lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM), a distinct disorder caused by proliferation of smooth muscle-like cells that, despite the similarity in the names, is unrelated to lymphangiomatosis. LAM occurs almost exclusively in women, while lymphangiomatosis is not as gender restricted.
NORD has separate reports on other lymphatic malformations, Gorham’s disease, lymphangioleiomyomatosis and several types of lymphangiectasia. (For more information on these disorders, choose the specific disorder name as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.).
Lymphatic disorders are a rapidly growing disease family and information about these disorders and the terminology used to describe them are constantly changing. Physicians and researchers are working to create a standardized classification and nomenclature system for these disorders.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of DPL are variable and there is no typical or standard presentation for the disorder. Generally, pulmonary lymphangiomatosis progresses faster in children than adults. Some individuals may eventually experience life-threatening complications, while others have mild symptoms that can go undiagnosed well until adulthood. Consequently, it is important to note that one person’s experience can vary dramatically from another’s. Affected individuals and parents of affected children should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
The specific symptoms associated with diffuse pulmonary lymphangiomatosis depend upon the size and exact location of affected lymphatic vessels. The disorder often causes a variety of general, nonspecific symptoms including fatigue and nausea as well as symptoms more directly related to the chest, including chest pain, wheezing, shortness of breath (dyspnea), chronic cough and coughing up blood (hemoptysis). Chest tightness, recurrent respiratory infections and recurrent pneumonia have also been reported in individuals with diffuse pulmonary lymphangiomatosis. Some individuals give a history of asthma, but the symptoms may be secondary to lymphangiomatosis rather than true asthma.
Diffuse pulmonary lymphangiomatosis can eventually cause compression of nearby structures in the chest, bony destruction leading to the appearance of “holes” in adjacent bones (lytic bone lesions), and other complications such as the accumulation of lymph fluid (chyle) in the space between the lung surface and chest wall (pleural space), a condition known as chylous pleural effusions. A collapsed lung (pneumothorax) can also occur. Some of these complications can be life-threatening e.g., when chylous pleural effusions become large enough to make breathing difficult, and when chyle accumulates in the sac around the heart (pericardial effusion) and makes it difficult for the heart to pump blood. The excess fluid in the lungs and other spaces also can lead to severe infection, as bacteria can grow in these excess fluid pockets.

