Distal Myopathy

synonyms:
Distal Muscular Dystrophy

overview:
Distal myopathy (or distal muscular dystrophy) is a general term for a group of rare progressive genetic disorders characterized by wasting (atrophy) and weakness of the voluntary distal muscles. The distal muscles are those farther from the center of the body and include the muscles of the lower arms and legs and the hands and feet. Conversely, the proximal muscles are the muscles closest to the center of the body such as the muscles of the shoulder, pelvis, and upper arms and legs. Although age of onset can occur anytime from infancy to adulthood, most forms develop later in life and are slowly progressive. Inheritance is autosomal dominant or recessive.
The distal myopathies belong to a larger group of disorders known as the muscular dystrophies. The muscular dystrophies are characterized by weakness and degeneration of various voluntary muscles of the body. Approximately 30 different disorders make up the muscular dystrophies. The disorders affect different muscles and have different ages of onset, severity and inheritance patterns.

symptoms:
The severity, specific symptoms, and progression of the distal myopathies vary greatly, even among members of the same family. Slowly progressive weakness and degeneration of the voluntary distal muscles characterizes these disorders. In some cases, additional muscles including various proximal muscles may become involved.
Welander Distal Myopathy
Most cases of this form of distal myopathy occur in individuals greater than 40 years of age. Certain muscles of the hands and feet (intrinsic muscles and long extensors) and certain muscles of the fingers and toes (extensors) are predominantly affected. Muscle weakness and degeneration ranges from mild to severe. The progression of muscle weakness is slow. Muscles in the hands are affected first with the muscles in the legs becoming involved later on or not at all. Welander distal myopathy has been identified with greater frequency in Sweden and Finland.
Udd Distal Myopathy (Tibial Distal Myopathy)
This form of distal myopathy is characterized by muscle weakness affecting the ankles that may spread to affect the muscles of the shinbone (tibia). Onset is usually after 35 years of age and progression is slow. Eventually the long extensors of the toes may become involved resulting in clumsiness and an inability to turn the feet and toes upward (foot drop), which may make it difficult to pick up the front of the foot when walking. In most cases, Udd distal myopathy only affects the lower limbs. By the mid seventies, some individuals may have involvement of the upper legs muscles (proximal muscles) and may experience mild to moderate difficulty walking.
Laing Distal Myopathy (Laing Early-Onset Distal Myopathy; Distal Myopathy 1; MPD1)
In most cases, Laing distal myopathy onset occurs before the age of 5 and has a distinct pattern of muscle weakness and degeneration. Initially, specific muscles of the ankles and great toes are affected. Muscles of the fingers may also be affected with the third and fourth fingers affected most severely. Additional findings may occur including weakness of neck flexion and mild weakness of certain facial muscles.
In some cases, onset of Laing distal myopathy may be early enough to cause delays in walking in affected infants. In other cases, no symptoms are apparent until the twenties. Approximately 10 years after the onset of distal muscle weakness, the proximal muscles may become mildly affected. Progression of Laing distal myopathy is extremely slow and no affected individuals have required a wheelchair even into their sixties.
Inclusion Body Myopathy Type 2 (IBM2; Distal Myopathy with Rimmed Vacuoles (DMRV); Nonaka Myopathy)
Inclusion body myopathy type 2 (IBM2) is characterized by progressive weakness and degeneration of the distal muscles of the legs. Onset ranges from 10 to 40 years of age, but is most common in the late teens to early twenties. Affected individuals may experience gait disturbances and foot drop. Muscle weakness eventually spreads to affect the hands and certain proximal muscles of the upper legs including the thigh and hamstrings. Approximately 20 years after the onset of IBM2, some affected individuals may eventually require a wheelchair.
The muscles of the shoulders and neck may become involved in some case. In rare cases, weakness of certain facial muscles may occur.
Miyoshi Myopathy
Onset of this form of distal myopathy is usually between 15-30 years of age. Affected individuals experience weakness and degeneration of the leg muscles, including the calves, which at first may appear bulky or abnormally large (pseudohypertrophy). Two muscles found in the calf, the gastrocnemius and soleus, are most often first affected by Miyoshi myopathy. Initially, affected individuals may be unable to stand on their toes. Eventually, muscle weakness spreads to affect the proximal muscles of the upper legs often causing difficulties climbing stairs, standing or walking. Muscles in the hands, forearms, and shoulder area may also become affected. As the disease progresses, affected individuals may eventually have significant difficulty walking and require a wheelchair.
The specific symptoms and severity of Miyoshi myopathy vary greatly. The disorder is caused by mutations of a gene, dysferlin, that also causes limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2B (LGMD2B), a rare muscle disorder characterized by weakness of the proximal muscles of the of the hip and shoulder areas (limb-girdle area). Families have been reported in which some members develop Miyoshi myopathy and others LGMD2B. In addition, some patients with dysferlin mutations can have an anterior tibial distribution of weakness. (For more information on this disorder, choose “limb-girdle muscular dystrophy” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
Distal Myopathy with Vocal Cord and Pharyngeal Signs (Distal Myopathy 2; MPD2)
This form of distal myopathy has only been described in one family. It is characterized by weakness and degeneration of the distal muscles of the hands and feet. In some cases, muscles of the shoulder area may become involved. Weakness of the vocal cord muscles and certain muscles of the throat (pharyngeal muscle) may also occur potentially resulting in difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) or the ingestion of food or liquids into the lungs (aspiration).
Distal Myopathy 3 (MPD3)
This extremely rare form of distal myopathy is characterized by muscle weakness and atrophy that can begin in the distal muscles of the arms or legs. Affected individuals may be clumsy with their hands or experience gait abnormalities (e.g., frequent stumbling). The disease will progress to affect additional muscles such as the proximal muscles of the upper legs. Mild contractures of the hands may be present. Onset has ranged from 32-45 years of age.

