Dominant Multiple Epiphyseal Dysplasia

synonyms:
MEDAD-MEDAutosomal Dominant Multiple Epiphyseal DysplasiadMED

overview:
Summary
Dominant multiple epiphyseal dysplasia is a general term for a group of genetic disorders characterized by skeletal malformations (dysplasia) including those affecting bones of the hands, feet, and knees. Joint pain, particularly of the hips or knees, is also common and often develops during childhood. Initial signs may include pain in the hips and knees following exercise. Progressive joint disease, particularly of the large weight-bearing bones, is common. Dominant multiple epiphyseal dysplasia is caused by mutations in certain genes. Five different genes are known to cause the disorder.
Introduction
Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia is a broad term for a group of disorders characterized by abnormal development of the bone and cartilage of the epiphyses, which are the rounded ends or “heads” of the long bones of the arms or legs. In the past, the disorder was subdivided into the milder Ribbing type and the more severe Fairbank type. These terms are no longer used. Researchers now know that multiple epiphyseal dysplasia represents a group or family of at least six disorders that are separated by the underlying genetic mutation that causes each subtype. Most subtypes are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. One form, multiple epiphyseal dysplasia type 4, is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. (NORD has a separate report on this disorder.)

symptoms:
The specific signs and symptoms of these disorders can vary from one person to another, even among those with the same subtype. Onset is usually in early childhood. Pain in the hips and knees following exercise is usually the initial sign of these disorders. Affected children may fatigue easily. Some affected children develop a waddling manner of walking (abnormal gait). Growth deficiency occurs in childhood and some children may be short for their age (mild to moderate short stature). Adult height is usually normal, but in the shorter range. An individual’s arms and legs may be short in comparison to the torso, which can become apparent during childhood. These growth features may be mild and difficult to appreciate.
Some young children may exhibit low muscle tone and reduced muscle strength (muscular hypotonia), knee and finger joints that stretch farther than normal (hypermobility), and restricted movement of the elbows.
Affected individuals also experience early onset of inflammation, pain and stiffness in affected joints (early-onset arthritis) that can develop into chronic joint pain (arthralgia). Joint problems can begin as early as 5 or 6 years of age, but is more likely to occur in the 30s. Multiple joints may be affected, particularly in adolescents. The knees and hips are commonly affected and deformation of the hips may occur. Joint pain is usually worse after physical exercise. Pain and loss of motion in the shoulders may occur in adulthood. Some individuals develop deformity or rigidity of affected joints due to shortening or hardening of muscles, tendons or other tissue (contractures). In severe cases, progressive joint damage can potentially result in significant disability and the need for joint replacement in the 30s or 40s.
In rare cases, additional symptoms may occur including a hip deformity in which the thigh bone is angled toward the center of the body (cox vara), bowed legs (genu varum), and ‘knock knees’ (genu valgum), a condition in which the legs bend inward so that when a person is standing the knees will touch even if the ankles and feet are apart. Another rare finding, known as a double-layered or double patella, may be associated with certain forms of dominant multiple epiphyseal dysplasia. The patella, or the kneecap, is the triangular bone that protects the front of the knee joint. A double patella has two bony (osseous) layers instead of one with cartilage in between. A double patella may not be associated with any symptoms (asymptomatic) or may lead to frequent dislocations, knee pain, and potentially functional disability of the knee.

