Dominant Titinopathy

synonyms:
TTN-related dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)cardiomyopathy, dilated, 1Gcardiomyopathy, familial hypertrophic, 9hereditary myopathy with early respiratory failure (HMERF)myopathy, myofibrillar, 9, with early respiratory failuretibial muscular dystrophy (TMD, Udd myopathy)tibial muscular dystrophy, tardive

overview:
Summary
Dominant titinopathy is a group of progressive conditions caused by disease-causing variants in theTTNgene. This gene makes a protein called titin, which is essential for the structure and function of the heart and skeletal muscles. Everyone has two copies of theTTNgene. Individuals with dominant titinopathy have one disease-causingTTNgene variant.
The most common symptoms of dominant titinopathy depend on whether the most affected muscle groups are cardiac versus skeletal. For people with heart muscle disease, this includes shortness of breath, palpitations, fatigue, or explained weight gain or leg swelling. For people who mainly have skeletal muscle involvement, there can be trouble walking or weakness in arm, leg or breathing muscles, limited range of motion of a joint (contractures) or curvature of the spine (scoliosis). The age of onset for dominant titinopathy can vary with most patients being diagnosed during adulthood. The severity of the condition and rate of progression are also hugely variable. The mechanisms that underlie this variability are not completely understood and appear to involve factors such as the location and type of genetic change as well as additional patient-related factors such as other illnesses and lifestyle.
There is wide diversity with the dominant titinopathy subtypes. Researchers do not fully understand all its forms and new ones continue to emerge. This diversity and complexity are a result of the giant size of the TTN gene. Researchers are still working to understand if some dominant forms are truly dominant, psuedodominant or a result of a combination of variants in 2 different genes (e.g. SRPK3 and TTN).
The diagnosis of dominant titinopathy requires the identification of heart or skeletal muscle dysfunction, together with genetic testing to identify aTTNgene variant. Clinical and genetic screening of family members may also be indicated. There are no specific treatments for this disorder and standard medical management is based on the presence and severity of heart and/or skeletal muscle dysfunction.
Introduction
There are several different dominantly inherited forms of titinopathy (dominant titinopathies) that can result from single disease-causing variants in just one copy of theTTNgene. These result in a range of heart and muscle problems that can typically develop in adulthood. Examples include:
TTN-related dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)hereditary myopathy with early respiratory failure (HMERF)tibial muscular dystrophy (TMD, Udd myopathy)other dominant titinopathies

symptoms:
Dilated Cardiomyopathy
DCM is one of the most common forms of dominant titinopathy. This is a primary disorder of the heart which is characterized by enlargement and reduced pumping action of the left (± right) ventricle. The clinical presentation ofTTN-related DCM can include symptoms and signs of heart failure, such as shortness of breath, fatigue and leg swelling. However, some patients with DCM have no symptoms and the diagnosis is made during routine heart testing.  Affected individuals may experience palpitations, dizzy spells or blackouts if there are abnormal heart rhythms coming from the atria or ventricles. DCM can occur at any age in people who have aTTNgene variant, but mostly occurs in mid-adult life. If untreated, DCM progresses, and some individuals may need implantable cardioverter-defibrillators or heart transplants. Many individuals have DCM as an isolated finding; however, DCM may also develop over time in people who initially present with skeletal muscle dysfunction.
Skeletal Myopathy
Dominant titinopathies can affect skeletal muscle in different ways. Some people can show severe symptoms, while some may not. Dominant titinopathy can present at any time, but skeletal features most often appear in adolescence. Symptoms usually start in the hands and feet (distal weakness) and later affect the large muscles closer to the body. Symptoms include muscle weakness, difficulty walking, difficulty moving the hands and feet and limitations in the range of motion of joints (contractures). Fatigue is also commonly seen. Oftentimes people will lift their foot high off the ground when moving (steppage gait) or have unusually high arches (pes cavus). As symptoms get worse, it may be difficult to breathe or hold oneself upright. Sometimes eating or chewing may be affected as well. A muscle enzyme called creatine kinase (CK) is sometimes elevated though it can be normal. Some of the sub-types of skeletal myopathy have specific clinical features (outlined below).
Hereditary Myopathy with Early Respiratory Failure(HMERF)
HMERF typically presents with variable breathing difficulties (respiratory insufficiency) beginning in middle age. There are problems with breathing muscles that can make it difficult to complete daily activities such as exercising, walking up stairs, or sleeping through the night. Another common first sign is a difficulty flexing ankles or “foot drop”, which may lead to falls. Many people experience weakness in the muscles around the hips (pelvic girdle weakness). Some patients also find it difficult to flex their fingers, quadriceps and neck. There may be changes in the size of the calf muscles. CK is typically mildly elevated but can be normal. The variants inTTNthat are typically associated with HMERF fall in a particular region of the gene called the 119thfibronectin-3 domain.
Tibial Muscular Dystrophy (TMD, Udd Myopathy)
Tibial muscular dystrophy presents around the ages of 40 or 50 years with thinning and weakness of the muscles on the anterior shin that lift the foot. This “foot drop” can lead to increased falls and tripping. Over time, thigh and pelvic girdle muscles may also become weaker, leading to a “waddling gait”, but arms remain unaffected. TMD does not lower the expected lifespan of someone with the disease. CK levels are typically normal or slightly elevated. There is a higher incidence of this disease in the Finnish population due to a commonTTNvariant known to cause TMD.
Other Dominant Titinopathies
Other singleTTNvariants have led to a spectrum of muscle disorders. There are some early onset clinical presentations with neonatal or infant weakness with early contractures (sometimes called arthrogryposis) and some later onset presentations similar to those described above. Some patients have cardiac disease, but not all.

