DOORS Syndrome

synonyms:
DOOR syndromedigito-reno-cerebral syndromeautosomal recessive deafness-onychodystrophy syndromedeafness-onychodystrophy-osteodystrophy-intellectual disability syndromedeafness-onycho-osteodystrophy-intellectual disability syndrome

overview:
DOORS syndrome is a rare multisystem genetic disorder that is typically recognized shortly after birth. DOORS is an acronym for the abnormalities that characterize the disorder: (D)eafness (sensorineural hearing loss); (O)nychodystrophy (malformation of the nails); (O)steodystrophy (malformation of certain bones); intellectual disability (previously referred to as mental (R)etardation), and in many cases, affected infants may experience (S)eizures (sudden episodes of uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain). DOORS syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Treatments are directed toward specific symptoms of affected individuals.

symptoms:
DOORS syndrome is typically identified at birth by these symptoms: deafness, malformation of the fingernails and toenails (onychodystrophy) and defective formation of certain bones (osteodystrophy) of the fingers and toes. The syndrome may also be associated with seizure disorders.
Most infants with DOORS syndrome have congenital deafness in both ears due to sensorineural hearing loss. This means that sound vibrations are not properly transmitted to the brain due to a defect of the inner ear or the auditory nerve, resulting in hearing loss. With normal hearing, a portion of the inner ear serves to convert sound vibrations to nerve impulses, which are then transmitted via the auditory nerve to the brain. Hearing loss may not be detected until later during infancy. Deafness may cause delays in speech or impaired development of speech.
Infants with DOORS syndrome also typically have abnormalities of the structure, texture and color of the fingernails and toenails (onychodystrophy). These abnormalities may include misshapen, discolored, underdeveloped and/or rudimentary nails. In some affected infants, some of the fingernails and/or toenails may be absent.
Various bone deformities of the fingers and/or toes (digits) may also be present (osteodystrophy). The thumbs and/or great toes are often long, with abnormally large bones at the ends of the digits. In addition, an extra third bone (rather than the normal two) may be present in the thumbs and/or great toes (triphalangeal thumb/great toe). In some patients, this extra bone may not be fully developed and/or may be malformed. Patients may have a permanent curving of the fifth finger (clinodactyly). There may also be underdevelopment or absence of the bones at the ends of the other fingers and/or toes. In addition, affected infants may have distinctive, abnormal skin ridge patterns (dermatoglyphics) in which there are arch patterns on every finger.
Infants with DOORS syndrome may also have varying degrees of intellectual disability, ranging from mild to profound. Some children may have variable delays in achieving developmental milestones (e.g., sitting, walking, etc.) as well as speech delay. Intellectual disabilities can vary significantly between patients but are often severe and require intervention.
During the first year of life, some affected infants may also begin to experience sudden episodes of uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain (seizures). Without sufficient management of seizures, this may result in further deterioration of intellectual functioning. During the most common type of seizure, a grand mal (generalized tonic-clonic) seizure, affected individuals may experience an abrupt loss of consciousness, generalized stiffening of muscles, rhythmic contraction and relaxation or uncontrollable jerking of muscle groups, and other findings. In addition, some may experience certain “warning symptoms” before a seizure. Severely affected children may have a prolonged series of such seizures, without fully regaining consciousness between attacks or experience a prolonged, continuous seizure attack while unconscious (status epilepticus). Some patients experience seizures that are difficult to control even with multiple antiepileptic medications, which have led to status epilepticus and can be life threatening.
Other possible symptoms include a wide nasal base, wide nasal bridge, gum enlargement (gingival overgrowth), low set ears, wide set eyes (hypertelorism), coarse facial features, downturned corners of mouth and a bulbous nose.

