Dravet Syndrome

synonyms:
DSsevere myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (SMEI)severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy – borderline (SMEI-B)epilepsy with polymorphic seizurespolymorphic epilepsy of infancy (PMEI)

overview:
Dravet syndrome (DS) is a severe form of epilepsy characterized by frequent, prolonged seizures often triggered by high body temperature (hyperthermia), developmental delay, speech impairment, ataxia, hypotonia, sleep disturbances, and other health problems. DS is thought to be at the severe end of a spectrum of disorders associated with changes (mutations) in genes for the sodium ion channel. The sodium ion channel is a gated pore-like structure in the cell membrane that regulates the movement of sodium ions into and out of the cell, helping to propagate electrical signals along neurons. Sodium ion channels are critical components of any tissue requiring electrical signals including the brain and heart.  More than 80% of patients with Dravet syndrome have a mutation in theSCN1Agene (Rosander 2015), but not allSCN1Amutations lead to Dravet syndrome. DS is considered an epileptic encephalopathy, or disorder of the brain due to seizures. In addition, it is considered a “channelopathy” because the effects of the mutation on the sodium channel appear to contribute to the disorder independently of the seizures.
DS appears during the first year of life in an otherwise healthy infant, usually with a generalized tonic clonic or hemiclonic seizure which is often prolonged (>5 minutes). Status epilepticus, or a seizure lasting longer than 5 minutes and sometimes 30 minutes or more, is common, especially in the early years, and requires emergency medical intervention. Additional seizure types including myoclonic, atypical absence, and complex partial seizures appear before age 5 years (Wirrell 2017).
The EEG, imaging, and development are usually normal at first, but abnormal EEGs and developmental delays often appear in the 2nd and 3rd years of life (Wirrell 2017). Delay can range from mild (rare) to moderate/severe (common), and most adult patients are dependent on caregivers (Catarino 2011).
Incoordination (ataxia) and low muscle tone (hypotonia) are often apparent in the early years and remain a characteristic of the syndrome throughout life (Villas 2017). Gait may worsen over time leading to decreased mobility in adolescence. Speech delay is frequently seen before age 2 years. Physical, occupational, and speech therapy are recommended (Wirrell 2017). Other common characteristics and health problems include behavioral issues, growth and nutrition issues, and disruptions of the autonomic nervous system, which regulates things such as body temperature and sweating (Lagae 2018).
Mortality is elevated in Dravet syndrome above that found in the general population of epilepsy patients. Estimates of mortality range from 15% to 20% by adulthood. Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) is the most common cause of death and usually occurs during sleep. The second most common cause of death is status epilepticus (SE) and complications from SE (Cooper 2016).
CarbamazepineOxcarbazepineLamotrigineVigabatrinPhenytoin (should be avoidedas a daily medication but may be useful in treatment of status epilepticus)
Other conditions believed to be on the spectrum ofSCN1A-associated disorders include (in order of increasing severity):
Febrile seizures (FS)Febrile seizures plus (FS+)Generalized (sometimes genetic) epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+)Intractable childhood epilepsy with generalized tonic clonic seizures (ICE-GTC)Dravet syndrome

symptoms:
The average age at seizure onset is 5.2 months, with a range of 1-18 months, but most often under 12 months (Cetica 2017, Wirrell 2017). The first seizure is often prolonged, either of the generalized tonic clonic or hemiclonic variation, and may or may not be associated with fever. Shorter seizures may also occur. Hyperthermia, or overheating, is a common seizure trigger in DS, and patients display heightened sensitivity to warm baths, fevers, exertion, and other forms of temperature elevation (Wirrell 2017).
Myoclonic seizures, when they occur, are typically seen by age 2 years but are not required for diagnosis. Non-convulsive status (obtundation status) focal seizures with impaired awareness and atypical absence seizures generally occur after 2 years. Typical absence seizures and epileptic spasms are unusual. The initial EEG, CT, MRI, and spinal tap are often normal, although background slowing may be evident if performed after a seizure. Subsequent EEGs may show diffuse slowing and/or generalized discharges while other imaging remains normal. MRI may show mild generalized atrophy or hippocampal sclerosis later in life.  Development is usually on track during the first year but delay often appears in the 2nd and 3rd years of life and is usually evident by age 18-60 months (Wirrell 2017).
In older children and adults, seizures persist, though status epilepticus becomes less frequent with time. Developmental delay, speech impairment, crouched gait, hypotonia, lack of coordination, and impaired dexterity are evident.
Any patient with a clinical history suggestive of DS should undergo genetic testing forSCN1Aand/or other epilepsy-related genes. The presence of anSCN1Amutation can help confirm diagnosis, but the presence of a mutation alone is not sufficient for diagnosis, nor does the absence of a mutation exclude diagnosis. Most experts believe an infant with two or more prolonged generalized tonic clonic or hemiclonic seizures with or without fever before age 12 months should undergo genetic testing (Wirrell 2017).

