Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic Symptoms (DReSS)

synonyms:
DReSS syndromeDRESS syndromedrug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptomsdrug induced hypersensitivity syndrome (DIHS)drug-induced pseudolymphomadrug-induced delayed multiorgan hypersensitivity syndrome (DIDMOHS)drug hypersensitivity syndrome (DHS)

overview:
Summary
Drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DReSS) is a rare disorder that can affect the skin, blood and any internal organs, most commonly the liver, kidney, lungs and heart. The cause of DReSS is multifactorial involving drug-exposure, genetic predisposition, viral reactivation and immune system responses. Clinical features of this condition are delayed after drug exposure, and proceed in a stepwise and variable fashion, making this syndrome challenging for both patients and physicians to recognize and diagnose. The prognosis for DReSS is highly dependent on the severity of the reaction and the speed with which diagnosis is made, the drug is discontinued and treatment is initiated. Possible outcomes of DReSS include complete recovery with no complications, illness related to end organ dysfunction, long term autoimmune disease and in rare cases, death. The mainstay treatment of DReSS is immediate withdrawal of the culprit drug, supportive treatment and immunosuppression depending on the severity of disease. Long term follow-up and slow treatment tapers are critical for preventing complications. Assessing viral reactivation is an important component in the management of the disease.

Introduction
DReSS is a rare drug reaction that can affect nearly any organ in the human body. Compared to other severe drug reactions like Stevens-Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS and TEN), DReSS has a more varied clinical presentation making it more challenging to diagnose. The combination of the three features of fever, skin rash and elevated eosinophils (a specific type of white blood cell) has been recognized since the 1930s, but the term DReSS is more recent. As eosinophilia is not always present and other blood count changes may occur (such as low platelets or anemia), many different names have been used to define this syndrome. Originally recognized as anticonvulsant hypersensitivity syndrome, other terms have been proposed over time such as drug-induced pseudolymphoma, drug-induced delayed multiorgan hypersensitivity syndrome (DIDMOHS) and hypersensitivity syndrome. In 1996 the term DRESS (drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms) was proposed to encompass these similar reactions and differentiate them from other severe drug reactions without eosinophilia. The word “rash” in DReSS was subsequently changed to “reaction” due to its diverse skin findings. The lowercase “e” is often used to denote that eosinophilia is not always present and other blood count changes may be seen. The term DReSS became internationally recognized and gained popularity in multiple countries, although it is not used everywhere. More recently, some have suggested that the “D” in DReSS should be re-examined as vaccines have also been shown to trigger DReSS. Based on the diversity of the clinical features and non-drug causes of DReSS, a further change in nomenclature may be required in the future.

symptoms:
DReSS most commonly begins with a flu-like prodrome of malaise, sore throat, fever and swollen lymph nodes. The lag time between drug exposure and symptom onset is typically between 2-8 weeks (although longer and shorter times have been reported). Additionally, with re-exposure to the drug symptoms can develop in just hours or days.
Skin findings typically occur a few days after the flu-like illness and are varied in their presentation. Typically, more than 50% of total body surface area is involved with a symmetric distribution starting on the face, upper trunk and upper extremities. The most common rashes reported are numerous small red bumps (maculopapular or “morbilliform”), hive-like (urticated papular) and full body redness with scaling (exfoliative erythroderma). Additionally, there can be target-like lesions, eczema-like lesions, dark purple patches and plaques (purpura), or a combination of all of these. Swelling of the face is often dramatic and can be a distinguishing feature from other drug rashes. Mucosal involvement is less common and may include oral ulcers and lip erosions, crusting and inflammation.
The bone marrow and blood cell counts are often affected in DReSS. Hypereosinophilia is the most common finding, followed by an elevated total white blood cell count (leukocytosis), elevated atypical lymphocytes, low lymphocytes, low white cell count and low or high platelets. Depression of all blood cell lines (pancytopenia) is associated with a more severe prognosis.
Systemic features of DReSS can occur days to weeks after initial symptom onset. Hence, it is important to closely monitor the signs and symptoms of possible systemic involvement as they may occur days to weeks after the initial presentation of the rash. The liver is the internal organ most commonly impaired in DReSS, occurring in up to 97% of cases. Manifestations range from asymptomatic elevation of liver enzymes to liver failure requiring liver transplant. The next most involved organ is the kidney which can present as mild acute kidney injury or severe kidney inflammation resulting in permanent end-stage renal disease. Elderly patients, allopurinol-associated DReSS, and those with pre-existing kidney disease are at the highest risk of renal impairment. The lung is the third most frequently impaired organ, with interstitial pneumonitis (lung inflammation) being the most common manifestation. Cardiac involvement in DReSS is becoming more frequently recognized, typically presenting as inflammation of the heart muscle or the lining around the heart (myocarditis or pericarditis). Heart involvement is often delayed in DReSS, occurring an average of 70 days after initial symptom onset. The most common signs and symptoms of cardiac DReSS are shortness of breath, chest pain, low blood pressure and elevated heart rate.
More infrequently there have been reports of DReSS causing inflammation in the pancreas, brain, meninges, colon, gallbladder and other organs.

