Duane syndrome

synonyms:
DR syndromeDuane radial ray syndrome (DRRS)Duane's retraction syndromeeye retraction syndromeretraction syndromeStilling-Turk-Duane syndrome

overview:
Duane syndrome (DS) is an eye movement disorder present at birth (congenital) characterized by horizontal eye movement limitation: a limited ability to move the eye inward toward the nose (adduction), outward toward the ear (abduction) or in both directions. When the affected eye(s) moves inward toward the nose, the eyeball retracts (pulls in) and the eye opening (palpebral fissure) narrows. In some patients, when the eye attempts to look inward, it moves upward (upshoot) or downward (downshoot).
Duane syndrome falls under the larger heading of strabismus (misalignment of the eyes) under the sub-classification of incomitant strabismus (misalignment of the eyes that varies with gaze directions) and subheading of what was previously termed extraocular fibrosis syndromes (conditions associated with fibrosis of the muscles that move the eyes), now termed congenital cranial dysinnervation disorders (CCDDs). The CCDDs are a group of congenital neuromuscular diseases resulting from developmental errors in innervation; the abnormalities involve one or more cranial nerves/nuclei with absence of normal innervation and/or secondary aberrant innervation. The group includes Duane syndrome, congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles (CFEOM), congenital ptosis, Marcus Gunn jaw winking, Möbius syndrome, crocodile tears, horizontal gaze palsy, congenital facial palsy and synergistic divergence (which has Duane similarities but no eyeball retraction, lid fissure narrowing and predominantly there is medial rectus involvement), but this is not an exhaustive list. Duane syndrome has been subdivided clinically into three types: type 1, type 2, and type 3.

symptoms:
The three types of Duane syndrome present as follows:
Duane syndrome type 1: The ability to move the affected eye(s) outward toward the ear (abduction) is limited, but the ability to move the affected eye(s) inward toward the nose (adduction) is normal or nearly so. The eye opening (palpebral fissure) narrows and the eyeball retracts into the orbit when looking inward toward the nose (adduction). When looking outward toward the ear (abduction), the reverse occurs.
Duane syndrome type 2: The ability to move the affected eye(s) inward toward the nose (adduction) is limited, whereas the ability to move the eye outward (abduction) is normal or only slightly limited. The eye opening (palpebral fissure) narrows and the eyeball retracts into the orbit when the affected eye(s) attempts to look inward toward the nose (adduction).
Duane syndrome type 3: The ability to move the affected eye(s) both inward toward the nose (adduction) and outward toward the ear (abduction) is limited. The eye opening narrows and the eyeball retracts when the affected eye(s) attempts to look inward toward the nose (adduction).
Each of these three types has been further classified into three subgroups designated A, B, and C to describe the eyes when looking straight (in primary gaze). In subgroup A, the affected eye is turned inward toward the nose (esotropia). In subgroup B, the affected eye is turned outward toward the ear (exotropia), and in subgroup C, the eyes are in a straight primary position. This part of the categorization is essentially equivalent to the alternative labels sometimes applied recently: Eso-Duane (equivalent to subgroup A), Exo-Duane (subgroup B) and Ortho-Duane (subgroup C).
Different clinical types may be present within the same family, suggesting that the same genetic abnormality may produce a range of clinical presentations.
The most common clinical presentation is type 1 DS (78% of cases) followed by type 3 (15%) and type 2 (7%). Involvement of both eyes (bilateral) is less common than involvement of one eye only (unilateral). Approximately 80-90% of cases are unilateral. Of the unilateral cases, the left eye is more often affected (72%). Amblyopia (reduced visual acuity in an eye) due to a lack of binocular vision occurs in up to 20% of people with DS and is more common in families with an autosomal dominantCHN1gene variant.
Duane syndrome is usually an isolated finding (approximately 70%) but may be associated with other malformations. Major anomalies associated with DS can be grouped into five categories: skeletal, auricular (having to do with the ears), ocular (having to do with the eyes) and neural (having to do with the nervous system) and renal (having to do with the kidneys and urinary tract).
DS can also be associated with other well-defined syndromes. These include Okihiro’s, Wildervanck, Holt-Oram, Goldenhar and Möbius syndromes.

