Dubin Johnson Syndrome

synonyms:
chronic idiopathic jaundiceconjugated hyperbilirubinemiaDJShyperbilirubinemia IIblack liver-jaundice syndromeDubin-Sprinz syndrome

overview:
Summary
Dubin Johnson syndrome (DJS) is a rare, benign genetic liver disorder. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern and is characterized by buildup of bilirubin, which is normally excreted by the liver into the bile. DJS is caused by a variant in the gene for the transporter protein that is responsible for moving the bilirubin, a normal breakdown product of red blood cells, into the bile which then leaves the body through the stool. It is a rare condition that is most often seen in Middle Eastern Jewish and Japanese people. In the Jewish population, about 60% of affected individuals also have an associated blood clotting abnormality, a prolonged prothrombin time (PT), caused by a decrease in factor VII. Most patients are asymptomatic and the other tests that are routinely used to measure liver function are normal. At times there can be jaundice, a yellowish color of the white portion of the eyes and rarely a slightly enlarged and tender liver. A characteristic aspect of DJS (which is unknown to the patient) is that the retained bilirubin pigment gives the liver a unique black color. Onset usually occurs during puberty or adulthood, but it has rarely been described in the newborn period. Use of alcohol, birth control pills, infection and pregnancy can lead to an increase in jaundice. In almost all patients, the most important aspect of DJS is recognizing that there is not a more serious cause of the jaundice.

symptoms:
Approximately 80% to 99% of people with DJS have intermittent jaundice caused by excess bilirubin (bile pigment) that cannot be excreted normally. It builds up in the liver cells and then goes into the blood and is deposited in the eyes and skin. The same pigment can cause an abnormal urine color. The liver functions normally aside from the loss of an important transporter protein needed to move bilirubin out of the liver. Other less common symptoms include fatigue and fever. Rarely, bilirubin levels can become so high that organ damage is possible.

