Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy

synonyms:
DMDdystrophinopathypseudohypertrophic myopathy

overview:
Summary
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a rare muscle disorder but it is one of the most frequent genetic conditions affecting approximately 1 in 3,500 male births worldwide. It is usually recognized between three and six years of age. DMD is characterized by weakness and wasting (atrophy) of the muscles of the pelvic area followed by the involvement of the shoulder muscles. As the disease progresses, muscle weakness and atrophy spread to affect the trunk and forearms and gradually progress to involve additional muscles of the body. In addition, the calves appear enlarged in most patients. The disease is progressive and most affected individuals require a wheelchair by the teenage years. Serious life-threatening complications may ultimately develop including disease of the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy) and breathing (respiratory) difficulties.
DMD is caused by changes (variants) of theDMDgene on the X chromosome. The gene regulates the production of a protein called dystrophin that is found in association with the inner side of the membrane of skeletal and cardiac muscle cells. Dystrophin is thought to play an important role in maintaining the membrane (sarcolemma) of muscle cells.
Introduction
Muscular dystrophies are characterized by specific abnormalities (e.g. variation of muscle fiber size, muscle fiber necrosis, scar tissue formation and inflammation) in muscle biopsy from the patients. Approximately 30 different genetic conditions make up the muscular dystrophies. DMD is classified as a dystrophinopathy. The dystrophinopathies are a spectrum of muscle diseases, each caused by alterations in the dystrophin gene. The most severe end of the spectrum is known as Duchenne muscular dystrophy lacking completely dystrophin protein. Decreased or truncated dystrophin protein is associated with less severe form is Becker muscular dystrophy.
The clinical hallmarks of DMD include weakness and wasting of various voluntary muscles of the body. In most advanced stages of the disease, the heart and gut muscles will be affected.

symptoms:
DMD usually becomes apparent early during childhood. Affected children develop weakness and wasting (atrophy) of the muscles closest to the trunk (proximal muscles) such as those of the upper legs and pelvic area and upper arms and shoulder area. However, a few other muscles appear disproportionally bulky. As the disease progresses, muscle weakness and atrophy spread to affect the lower legs, forearms, neck and trunk. The rate of progression is quite similar from person to person but individual variation may happen.
In children with DMD, initial findings may include delays in reaching developmental milestones such as sitting or standing without assistance; toe walking; an unusual, waddling manner of walking (gait); difficulty climbing stairs or rising from a sitting position (Gower’s sign); and repeated falling. Toddlers and young children may seem awkward and clumsy and may exhibit abnormal enlargement of the calves due to scarring of muscles (pseudohypertrophy). Parents may be falsely encouraged by an apparent improvement between the ages of 3 and 5, but this may be due to natural growth and development. As the disease progresses, additional abnormalities may develop such as progressive curvature of the spine (scoliosis or lordosis), wasting of thigh and pectoral muscles, and abnormal fixation of certain joints (contractures). A contracture occurs when thickening and shortening of tissue such as muscle fibers causes deformity and restricts movement of affected areas, especially the joints. Without physical therapy treatment, leg braces may be needed by age 8-9 to assist affected individuals to walk. By approximately ages 10 to 12, most affected individuals require a wheelchair.
Children with DMD have reduced bone density and an increased risk of developing fractures of certain bones, such as hips and spine. Many affected individuals will display mild to moderate degrees of non-progressive intellectual impairment and learning disabilities.
By the late teens, DMD may also be characterized by additional potentially life-threatening complications including weakness and deterioration of the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy). Cardiomyopathy can result in impairment in the ability of the heart to pump blood, irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias), and heart failure. Another serious complication associated with DMD is weakness and deterioration of muscles in the rib cage. This can result in an increased susceptibility to respiratory infections (e.g., pneumonia), difficulty coughing, and, ultimately, respiratory failure.
Involvement of muscles within the gastrointestinal tract may result in dysmotility, a condition in which the passage of food through the digestive tract usually because of slow and uncoordinated movements of the muscles of the digestive tract. Gastrointestinal dysmotility may result in constipation and diarrhea.
One third of patients with DMD may have various degree of cognitive impairment including learning disability, attention deficit and autistic spectrum disorder.

