Duodenal Atresia or Stenosis

synonyms:
Duodenal AtresiaDuodenal Stenosis

overview:
Duodenal atresia or stenosis is a rare congenital digestive disorder that usually occurs for no apparent reason (sporadically). However, a few cases of duodenal atresia have been inherited as an autosomal recessive genetic trait.
Duodenal atresia is a disease of newborn infants. Absence or complete closure (atresia) of a portion of the channel (lumen) within the first part of the small intestine (duodenum), or partial obstruction due to narrowing (stenosis) of the duodenum, is present. Other associated abnormalities may be found in over half of those affected with duodenal atresia or duodenal stenosis.

symptoms:
Duodenal atresia and duodenal stenosis are abnormalities in which there is an absence or complete closure (atresia) in the first part of the small intestines (duodenum) or narrowing (stenosis) of the duodenum.  These obstructions in the digestive tract of infants prevent proper absorption of food.
The defect in the duodenum may be located in the area where the pancreatic and bile ducts join as they open into the first part of the small intestines (ampulla of Vater,) or in the portion of the duodenum furthest from the opening of the ampulla of Vater.  There may be an absence of the channel at the top of the small intestine, a ring or web in the duodenum, an abnormally small channel at the top of the small intestines, or the duodenum may end with just a short chord going to the bowel.
Symptoms of a complete blockage of the duodenum may include bilious vomiting (a yellow-green secretion arising from the liver or in some cases a clear or light brown granular matter) typically beginning a few hours after birth, distention or swelling of the upper abdomen, constipation resistant to treatment, a yellow discoloration of the skin (jaundice) and/or an excess of amniotic fluid detected before birth (polyhydramnios) through ultrasound.
Symptoms of partial duodenal blockage vary depending on the severity. They may wax and wane not appearing for weeks, months, or years.  Prolonged vomiting along with dehydration may also occur.
Other problems associated with this disorder may include intestines that are shorter than normal, low birth weight, premature birth, and/or an imbalance of electrolytes (the elements in the blood, tissue, and cell fluid needed in correct amounts for the use of energy).
Associated abnormalities have been found in some infants with duodenal atresia or duodenal stenosis.  Twenty to thirty percent of individuals affected with these disorders have Down syndrome and twenty-two percent have heart disease.  An abnormal rotation of the colon, a ring shaped pancreas encircling a portion of the duodenum (annulas pancreas), an abnormal tubelike passage between the windpipe and esophagus (tracheoesophageal fistula), and/or kidney malformations can also be associated with these conditions. (For more information on these disorders choose “Esophageal Atresia”, “Down Syndrome”, and/or “Tracheoesophageal Fistula” as your search terms in the Rare Disease Database).

