Dysplasia Epiphysealis Hemimelica

synonyms:
DEHTrevor's disease

overview:
Dysplasia epiphysealis hemimelica (DEH), also known as Trevor’s disease, is a developmental bone disease of childhood. It is very rare and clinical experience with this condition is limited. It is extremely rare in adults. Most cases are diagnosed before 8 years of age. It is characterized by a benign, abnormal growth of cartilage arising most frequently from the pre-existing cartilage of the distal ends (epiphysis)of the long bones. The joints of the lower limbs are most frequently affected including the ankle, knee, hip joints and the foot bones. The upper limbs are less frequently affected. The abnormal cartilage produces an irregular mass with varying degrees of deformities of the bone and adjacent joints. DEH may affect a single bone (localized form), multiple bones in a single limb (classical form) or an entire limb (generalized) usually involving a leg from the pelvis to the foot. Approximately two-thirds of affected children have the classic form. The lesions are usually located on the same side of the limbs, mostly medial, and this is called hemimelia. DEH was first described in the medical literature in 1926. Trevor recognized this condition in 1950. The name, dysplasia epiphysealis hemimelica first appeared in the medical literature in 1956.

symptoms:
The symptoms present in each child with DEH vary depending on the location and size of the cartilage mass. The most common is a painless mass or swelling on one side of an affected joint, mostly the medial side. Associated pain occurs at the beginning or at a later stage of the disease.
Additional symptoms have been reported including decreased range of motion of affected joints, joint deformity, limb length discrepancy and muscle weakness in the involved area. Rarely, the joint may lock. Some children may limp due to damage of the involved joints of the lower extremities. If left untreated, the joint will develop degenerative arthritis.
A small number of children with DEH have, in addition to the symptoms described above, calcified structures within the joints, which are described as “loose bodies” and are recognized by radiographs and CT studies. They represent osteocartilaginous fragments of DEH tissue, originally located in the distal end of the long bones, which has spread out into the adjacent joint.

