Dystonia

synonyms:
torsion dystonia

overview:
Summary
Dystonia is a general term for a large group of movement disorders that vary in their symptoms, causes, progression and treatments. This group of neurological conditions is generally characterized by involuntary muscle contractions that force the body into abnormal, sometimes painful, movements and positions (postures). The muscular contractions may be sustained or come and go (intermittent). Movements may be patterned and twisting and/or in some cases shaking or quivering (tremulous) resembling a tremor. Dystonia may occur or be worsened when an individual attempts a voluntary action. There are many different causes for dystonia. Genetic as well as non-genetic factors can contribute to the development of these disorders. In some cases, the exact, underlying cause is unknown (idiopathic). The most characteristic finding associated with most forms of dystonia is twisting, repetitive movements that affect the neck, torso, limbs, eyes, face, vocal chords and/or a combination of these muscle groups. Certain forms such as laryngeal dystonia are not associated with abnormal postures. Dystonia causes varying degrees of disability that range from mild symptoms that come and go to severe, debilitating symptoms that can significantly affect a person’s quality of life. Some patients have pain. Usually there is no weakness in the affected muscle groups. In some people, dystonia can become progressively worse, while in others it remains unchanged or no longer worsens (plateaus). Dystonia may even spontaneously remit in rare cases. The onset of dystonia can be very early in life or during adulthood, depending on the cause. Treatment for dystonia depends upon several factors including the specific subtype present and can include medications, botulinum toxin injections, physical therapy and surgery.
Introduction
Dystonia was first described in the medical literature as far back as the 1800s. The classification of dystonia has always been complicated and controversial, resulting in confusion, not only for patients, but within the medical community as well. A basis for classifying the dystonias has been proposed based on a consensus achieved by an international expert group of physicians (Albanese A, et al. 2013). This group has proposed to classify dystonia based on clinical features and etiology.
Classifying dystonia by clinical features includes age of onset, body distribution, temporal pattern and associated features. Age of onset is broken down into infancy (birth to 2 years), childhood (3-12 years), adolescence (13-20), early adulthood (21-40) and late adulthood (greater than 40 years). Dystonia that develops during infancy or childhood is more likely to have a known cause and to progress to become widespread.
Classifying dystonia by the specific body part(s) affected is common to many classification systems. Generally, dystonia may be focal (affecting an isolated body part), segmental (affecting adjacent body areas), multifocal (two or more noncontiguous areas), generalized (affecting the trunk and two other body regions) and affecting one side of the body (hemidystonia).
Temporal pattern helps to distinguish between dystonia that becomes progressively worse in terms of intensity and/or involvement of other muscles groups or remains unchanged (static). It also refers to the variability in disease expression in relation to other factors such as external triggers or voluntary actions. Temporal patterns can be broken down into four types: persistent, in which dystonia persists throughout the day without fluctuation; task-specific, in which dystonia occurs only during a specific action or task (e.g. writer’s cramp); diurnal fluctuations, in which dystonia fluctuates in severity at certain points throughout the day and often lessens during the night; and paroxysmal in which a sudden, temporary episode of dystonia occurs often as the result of a specific trigger.
Dystonia can also be classified by whether it occurs along with another movement disorder. Isolated dystonia is when dystonia is the only motor feature except for tremor. Combined dystonia is used when another movement disorder such as Parkinsonism or myoclonus is also present.
The etiology axis refers to whether degenerative changes or structural damage is present in the nervous system (nervous system pathology) and whether the disorder is inherited or acquired, or whether the underlying cause is unknown or unproven (idiopathic).
Previous terminology used to categorize dystonia includes primary dystonia, secondary dystonia, dystonia plus syndromes and heredodegenerative dystonia. Primary dystonia referred to cases in which dystonia was the only clinical feature (isolated dystonia), there was no evidence of brain degeneration and without an acquired cause. Primary dystonia may be inherited or occur for unknown reasons (idiopathic). Secondary dystonia referred to cases in which dystonia resulted from a broad range of causes including genetic variants, birth injury, stroke, brain tumors, certain infections and as a reaction to certain drugs. Dystonia plus syndromes referred to disorders in which dystonia occurred in conjunction with another neurological disorder such as myoclonus or Parkinsonism. Heredodegenerative dystonia referred to hereditary cases that were associated with neurodegeneration and occur with other neurological symptoms.
Until a consistent, straightforward classification system is adopted by the medical community confusion regarding terminology in describing dystonia will persist. In addition, dystonia is a rapidly growing disease family and information about these disorders is constantly changing.

symptoms:
Early onset childhood dystonia (generalized dystonia) is a neurologic movement disorder that usually begins in childhood or adolescence. Symptoms start in one part of the body (usually an arm or leg) and may eventually spread to other parts of the body, causing contractions and spasms of muscles that twist the body into unnatural positions. The most frequent cases of hereditary form of dystonia are changes (pathogenic variants) in theTOR1Agene (especially in the Ashkenazy Jewish population), previously called DYT1-dystonia, and in theKMT2Bgene (previously called DYT28 dystonia).
Specific symptoms can vary from one person to another even among individuals with the same subtype. Specific symptoms may occur based upon the specific part of the body involved, age of onset and the underlying cause. Dystonias with an earlier age of onset are more likely to progress from a focal presentation to a generalized one and are usually more severe. Adult-onset forms of dystonia tend to have a focal presentation and usually do not progress.
Some affected individuals can temporarily interrupt dystonic movements or postures by performing a specific action or maneuver. This is known as ‘gestes antagoniste’ or a sensory trick. Usually, the action involves a body part not affected by dystonia, but often nearby the affected area. For example, some individuals can temporarily alleviate cervical dystonia by touching their chins. Changing the pattern of muscle activation can also improve certain dystonic postures. For example, in patients with foot dystonia causing an abnormal turning of one foot when walking, when asked to run or to walk backwards they can present a reduction of this abnormal posturing.
Some of the better-known forms of dystonia are briefly discussed below. NORD has individual reports on many of the specific dystonia subtypes. For more information, choose the specific disorder name as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.
ISOLATED FOCAL DYSTONIA
Isolated focal dystonias are the most common dystonias and can include benign essential blepharospasm, cervical dystonia, oromandibular dystonia and laryngeal dystonia. These dystonias often have adult onset. NORD has individual reports on these forms of dystonia.
Isolated limb dystonia may occur in adults and often affects the arms and/or hands. Many are occupational or task specific. Occupational or task-specific dystonia are general terms that refer to focal dystonia associated with a specific, often repetitive, activity. Initially, affected individuals may exhibit a lack of dexterity when performing the activity. Eventually, the condition progresses to cause repetitive movements and abnormal postures or, in some people, affect other activities involving the same body part. The most common form may be writer’s cramp, in which abnormal flexion, extension or rotation of the fingers and wrist occurs when an affected individual writes. In some people, writing with the unaffected hand (contralateral) can induce dystonic posturing in the affected hand. This phenomenon is called “mirror movements”.
Musician’s dystonia is a form of task-specific dystonia that involves muscles that are involved with performance. Symptoms occur when musicians attempt to play an instrument. Focal hand dystonia and embouchure dystonia are the most common forms. Focal hand dystonia is characterized by painless loss of muscular control in relation to highly practiced movements (as seen with pianists, guitarists, etc.).
Embouchure dystonia is a specific form of musician’s dystonia that affects individuals who play brass and woodwind instruments. This form of dystonia can affect the muscles of the mouth, face, jaw and tongue. The muscular contractions that characterize embouchure dystonia may only occur when the musician is playing or blowing into the mouthpiece of the instrument.
INHERITED DYSTONIA
A genetic classification for dystonia was established that sub-classified dystonia is based upon the specific genetic variant associated with the subtype. Initially, disorders were given the official abbreviation DYT and a number (e.g. DYT1). The subtypes are numbered in the order they were identified in the medical literature. However, this classification has several problems. Designations were assigned without a known gene so that individuals with one form of dystonia were eventually found to have an existing form. For example, individuals with DYT14 were eventually determined to have DYT5. A more recent nomenclature proposes that different forms of dystonia are designated by the prefix DYT- followed by the name of causal gene (Marras et al., 2016). For example, instead of DYT1 dystonia, this form is now called DYT-TOR1A. Another issue is that some disorders included in this classification system do not have dystonia as the primary symptom, but rather another neurological finding such as myoclonus or parkinsonism. These forms are designated with a prefix describing both phenotypes followed by the causative gene name. For example, the X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism (also known as “Lubag disease”) previously called DYT3 is now referred to as DYT/PARK-TAF1. Furthermore, many genetically determined disorders with dystonia as a feature are not included in the classification such as Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, Wilson’s disease and deafness-dystonia-optic neuronopathy syndrome.
Some of the better-known forms of inherited dystonia are described below.
DYT-TOR1A-related dystonia (previously called DYT1) usually begins in childhood or adolescence. However, the disorder may also develop later during life. Symptoms usually start in one part of the body (usually an arm or leg) and may eventually spread to other parts of the body, causing contractions and spasms of muscles that twist the body into unnatural positions. Severity can vary greatly from one person to another, even among members of the same family. The disorder can potentially cause significant disability in childhood while, in other cases it can remain undiagnosed until adulthood with only mild symptoms. DYT1-related dystonia is the most common hereditary form of dystonia and is caused by variants in theDYT1(also known asTOR1A) gene. This form of dystonia is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
DYT-KMT2B(previously called DYT28) dystonia is a genetic form of early onset generalized dystonia that was identified in 2016. Although rare, this form of dystonia seems to account for almost 10% of genetic cases of generalized pediatric dystonia. Dystonia is associated with several features (such as small stature, elongated face, broad nasal base and bulbous nasal tip) as well as intellectual disability and developmental delay, microcephaly, renal and respiratory involvement, skin and eye symptoms which can help guide the diagnosis in these patients. This disorder is caused by variants in theKMT2Bgene. Most patients have ade novogene variant, which are genetic changes that spontaneously arose in patients and are not inherited from a parent. The disease is transmitted in an autosomal dominant manner. Several studies have reported a very positive response to treatment with DBS in these patients (Rajan et al., 2021). Therefore, genetic diagnosis can be crucial in these cases to guide therapeutical approaches.
X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism (or “Lubag disease”, DYT/PARK-TAF1or DYT3) is a form of dystonia found almost exclusively among men from the Philippine Island of Panay. Most female carriers do not develop symptoms (asymptomatic). The symptoms and clinical course are highly variable. Affected individuals may develop symptoms associated with Parkinsonism including abnormal slowness of movement (bradykinesia), resting tremor and an inability to remain in a stable or balanced position (postural instability). Eventually, dystonia develops that usually is focal, most commonly affecting the jaw, neck, trunk or eyes. Some individuals only develop Parkinsonism, which tends to be slowly progressive. Parkinsonism can be more severe, eventually resulting in an unstable gait and recurrent falls. Dystonia tends to be progressive and can become generalized or multifocal. Individuals with a combination of dystonia and Parkinsonism can develop severe, life-threatening complications. The mean age of onset of X-linked dystonia-parkinsonism is 39 years of age. This disorder is caused by variants in theTAF1gene.
Dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD) is a general term for a few disorders in which generalized dystonia and Parkinsonism are present and often dramatically respond to treatment with levodopa. Levodopa is an amino acid that is converted to dopamine. Dopamine is a brain chemical that serves as a neurotransmitter and is deficient in individuals with DRD. Affected individuals may be misdiagnosed as having cerebral palsy or Parkinson’s disease. Two main forms have been identified and are known as Segawa syndrome, due to variants of the GTP cyclohydrolase 1 (GCH1) gene (called DYT/PARK-GCH1), and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) deficiency (called DYT/PARK-TH), although many other disorders may mimic dopa-responsive dystonia, including juvenile Parkinsonism. Segawa syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner; tyrosine hydroxylase deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. NORD has individual reports on both disorders. These disorders are also known as DYT5A and DYT5B. Recessive forms of dopa-responsive dystonia can also be caused by sepiapterin reductase (SPR) deficiency.
DYT-THAP1dystonia (previously called DYT6) is characterized by dystonia affecting the cranial, cervical and laryngeal areas. Dystonia tends to worsen and spread to other areas (generalized dystonia). Some individuals initially exhibit dystonia affecting the arms and later develop cranial and cervical dystonia symptoms. Most often, this disorder has a juvenile onset. DYT-THAP1is caused by variants in theTHAP1gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
Paroxysmal nonkinesigenic dyskinesia (PKND) is a disorder characterized by episodes of dystonia and choreoathetosis. Choreoathetosis is characterized by irregular, rapid, jerky movements that may occur in association with slow, writhing motions. Episodes may last from minutes to hours and can recur multiple times per day or per month. Episodes are often triggered by alcohol, caffeine, hunger, fatigue, stress and nicotine. Movement does not trigger an episode. The onset of the disorder can vary from early childhood to early adulthood. The disorder can potentially be disabling because it can interfere with basic activities such as chewing, swallowing, speaking, walking and coordinating movements of the arms and hands. PNKD is caused by variants in theMR1gene (also calledPNKDgene) and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. In some cases, the disorder occurs randomly, for unknown reasons (sporadically). The disorder is also known as PxMD-PNKD(previously called DYT8), paroxysmal dystonic choreoathetosis, or Mount-Reback syndrome.
Paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia (PKD), also known as PxMD-PRRT2(previously named DYT10), is characterized by episodes of dystonia and choreoathetosis that are triggered by sudden movements or when startled. Episodes usually last seconds or minutes. In some cases, as many as 100 episodes can occur in a single day; in others as few as one a month may occur. In rare cases, jerky, flailing or swinging movements (ballism) may also be seen. Some affected individuals may experience abnormal sensations (aura) in the affected area just before an attack occurs. Age of onset is usually in childhood or adolescence, but the disorder has been reported in individuals ranging from 4 to 57 years of age. PKD is caused by variants in thePRRT2gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. These symptoms respond extremely well to a low dose of an antiepileptic medication called carbamazepine.
Myoclonic dystonia, previously known as DTY11, myoclonus-dystonia, or according to the updated nomenclature DYT-SGCE, is characterized by rapid, involuntary, jerking movements (myoclonus) with or without sustained dystonic postures. Myoclonus most often affects the neck, trunk and upper arms. Less commonly, the legs are involved. Myoclonus is caused by muscle contractions or muscle relaxation and cannot be controlled by the affected individual. Affected individuals may also develop focal or segmental dystonia (e.g. writer’s cramp or cervical dystonia). Generally, dystonia does not worsen or progress to other areas. Additional symptoms that have been reported include panic attacks, anxiety, depression and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Onset is usually during childhood or adolescence. Most cases of myoclonus-dystonia are caused by variants in theSGCEgene. The disorder is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
Rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism (RDP), also known as DYT12 or DYT/PARK-ATP1A3, is characterized by dystonic features and additional symptoms that resemble those seen in Parkinson’s disease (Parkinsonism). Classic features include involuntary dystonic muscle spasms in the arms more often than the legs and prominent involvement of speech and swallowing muscles. Parkinsonian symptoms include involuntary, rhythmic, quivering movements (tremors), bradykinesia and postural instability. Seizures have been reported in some patients. As the name suggests, symptoms usually develop rapidly over a period of a few hours or days, and often after a triggering event such as emotional stress, alcoholic binge drinking, childbirth or certain forms of exercise such as running. RDP is caused by variants in theATP1A3gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. RDP usually begins in adolescence or young adulthood and stabilizes within approximately 4 weeks, with little progression of the disorder thereafter, however the availability of genetic testing has revealed that the clinical spectrum of the disorder is wider than initially appreciated, including alternating hemiplegia of childhood (For more information on this condition, choose “alternating hemiplegia of childhood” in the Rare Disease Database.)
Paroxysmal exertion-induced dyskinesia, also known as PxMD-SLC2A1or DYT18, is characterized by the combination of chorea, athetosis and dystonia that primarily affects excessively exercised areas of the body. The legs are most commonly affected. An episode may last from a few minutes to more than an hour and occurs after prolonged physical activity or exercise. In some people, additional symptoms have been reported including seizures, hemolytic anemia and migraines. Paroxysmal exertion-induced dyskinesia is caused by variants in theSCL2A1gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
ACQUIRED DYSTONIA
Acquired dystonia may be the result of environmental or disease-related damage to a part of the brain or central nervous system (See Causes section below). Acquired dystonia often presents with other neurological findings such as Parkinsonism. The specific symptoms and severity of these disorders vary based upon the underlying causes, specific body areas involved and other factors.
A specific form of acquired dystonia is tardive dyskinesia, which encompasses forms of dystonia that are induced using certain drugs. Tardive dyskinesia causes quick repetitive movements without sustained postures. Tardive dystonia is generally considered a severe form of tardive dyskinesia characterized by muscle contractions resulting in slower, writhing movements. NORD has an individual report on tardive dyskinesia.

