Ectrodactyly Ectodermal Dysplasia Cleft LipPalate

synonyms:
ectrodactyly-ectodermal dysplasia-clefting syndromeectrodactyly-ectodermal dysplasia-orofacial cleftsEEC syndrome

overview:
Ectrodactyly ectodermal dysplasia cleft lip/palate (EEC) syndrome is a rare genetic disorder. Symptoms can vary greatly from one person to another. Affected individuals often have abnormalities affecting the limbs including ectrodactyly, a condition in which part or all of the central digits (fingers or toes) are missing. Ectrodactyly often affects the middle fingers or toes, but can present differently in different people (or be absent altogether). A groove or gap in the upper lip (cleft lip) and a groove or gap in the roof of the mouth (cleft palate) may also occur. The ectodermal dysplasia component refers to abnormalities to structures that arise from the outermost layer of the embryo (ectoderm). In EEC syndrome, this generally affects the hair, teeth, nails, skin and sweat glands. Individuals with EEC syndrome can also develop a variety of additional symptoms including abnormalities of the genitourinary system and the eyes. Intelligence does not seem to be affected. Most cases of EEC syndrome are caused by mutations of theTP63gene and are either new (spontaneous) mutations or are inherited as autosomal dominant disorders.
Introduction
There are at least four other syndromes caused by mutations of theTP63gene including AEC/Hay-wells syndrome, Rapp-Hodgkin syndrome, limb-mammary syndrome, and ADULT syndrome. In addition,TP63mutations have also been reported as the cause of nonsyndromic split hand/foot malformation and nonsyndromic cleft lip/palate (CL/P). There is considerable overlap among these disorders and some researchers consider them different expressions of one disease process. Despite the overlap, theTP63-associated syndromes have their own characteristic physical findings related, in part, to the specific mutation of theTP63gene present. These syndromes are further classified as forms of ectodermal dysplasia, a group of disorders characterized by abnormalities that occur during early embryonic development. Ectodermal dysplasias typically affect the hair, teeth, nails and/or skin.

symptoms:
The symptoms of EEC syndrome are highly variable, even among members of the same family. The variability is due, in part, to different mutations of theTP63gene (e.g., certain mutations are more likely to be associated with certain symptoms). Affected individuals or their parents should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
Ectrodactyly, which is also known as split hand/foot malformation (SHFM), is a condition characterized by absence or malformation of one or more of the fingers or toes. Usually, the middle fingers or toes are affected. All four hands and feet may be affected in some individuals. However, some individuals have only mild malformation or are unaffected. Individuals with EEC may also exhibit webbing or fusion (syndactyly) of some of the fingers and/or toes. In some cases, syndactyly is the only limb defect that occurs.
Affected individuals have cleft lip with or without cleft palate. Additional distinctive facial features can occur including an undeveloped upper jaw (maxillary hypoplasia), a broad nasal tip, an abnormally long groove (philtrum) between the nose and the upper lip, and narrowing or blockage of the nasal airways (choanal atresia).
The type and severity of ectodermal dysplasia in individuals with EEC syndrome is highly variable. The skin, hair, teeth, and sweat glands are commonly affected. Affected individuals may have dry, discolored (hypopigmented) skin. The skin may also be itchy. In some patients, mildly thickened, scaly patches of skin (hyperkeratosis) may also develop. Individuals tend to be fair skinned and have sparse, coarse, slow-growing scalp hair. Eyelashes or eyebrows may be sparse or absent.
Additional symptoms can include slow-growing, thin, malformed (dysplastic) nails and missing, malformed or underdeveloped teeth (hypodontia). Tooth decay (dental caries) is common and often severe. Tooth enamel may be abnormal. Some individuals experience reduced activity or absence of certain exocrine glands (glands that secrete into ducts) including the sweat, salivary, and small oil-producing (sebaceous) glands. Abnormality of the sweat glands can lead to a reduced ability to sweat (hypohidrosis), which can be associated with heat intolerance and fever. Abnormality of the salivary glands can lead to dry mouth (xerostomia).
Some individuals have eye issues including abnormalities of the tear (lacrimal) ducts that can cause frequent tearing, increased susceptibility to eye infections and chronic inflammation of the delicate membranes that line the inside of the eyes (conjunctivitis), potentially causing vision impairment. Additional abnormalities affecting the eyes can occur including sensitivity to light (photophobia), corneal ulcerations, inflammation of the cornea (keratitis), and inflammation of the eyelashes and eyelids (blepharitis).
In some cases, affected individuals may have genitourinary anomalies. Virtually any part of the genitourinary tract can be involved. Symptoms can include absence of the kidneys (renal agenesis), narrowing of the tubes that carry urine out of the body from the bladder (urethral atresia), and obstruction of the tubes (ureters) that carry urine from the kidney to the bladder, resulting in the accumulation of urine in the pelvis and kidney duct (hydronephrosis). An extremely uncommon genitourinary complication known as atrophic/dysplastic bladder epithelium has been reported in individuals with EEC syndrome. Epithelium refers to specific tissue that lines many of the cavities and structures within the body such as the bladder. In affected individuals, abnormal thinning of this lining within the bladder results in painful urination (dysuria), increased urgency to urinate and an increased frequency to urinate.
Additional abnormalities have been reported in some cases including underdeveloped (hypoplastic) nipples. Some individuals with EEC syndrome have developed hearing loss. The ears can be abnormally small and the outer part of the ears (auricles) malformed. Some individuals may develop glandular abnormalities such as an underdeveloped thymus and reduced activity of the pituitary gland (hypopituitarism). Glandular abnormalities can result in growth hormone deficiency.
Intelligence is usually unaffected in children with EEC syndrome. Language development, however, may be delayed due to certain associated abnormalities such as cleft lip/palate or hearing impairment.

