Ehlers Danlos Syndrome

synonyms:
EDSE-D Syndrome

overview:
Summary
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a group of related disorders caused by different genetic defects in collagen. Collagen is one of the major structural components of the body. Collagen is a tough, fibrous, protein, and serves as a building block essential in both strengthening connective tissue (e.g. bones) and providing flexibility where needed (e.g. cartilage). The problems seen in patients with EDS can be due to either the poor strength of collagen. It may alternatively be due to the absence of sufficient amounts of structurally normal collagen. The primary complications seen in EDS involve the skin, muscles, skeleton, and blood vessels. Patients with EDS often have skin that can be describes as “velvety”, “loose”. This skin characteristic predisposes patients to problems with wound healing. Patients will often note that they develop “paper-thin” scars. Patients also have excessively flexible, loose joints. These ‘hypermobile’ joints can be easily and frequently dislocated. Finally, fragile blood vessels leave patients experiencing easy bruising, even an increased tendency to serious episodes of bleeding.
Each subtype of EDS results from a distinct genetic change. Patients within each specific subtype share characteristics other than the primary problems described above, and are covered in detail below. There may be significant variation in the experiences of individuals within each subtype.
Introduction
The named subtypes of EDS have undergone extensive reorganization as more information becomes available. EDS was originally categorized under eleven Roman numeral designations (EDS I -EDS XI), based primarily on symptoms and mode of inheritance. Later, EDS was classified into six subtypes based on the characteristic features of each type. In 2017, the International Classification for the Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes was published, in which thirteen descriptive subtypes are recognized. The 2017 International Classification most recently outlines a classification based on underlying genetic causes (Group A-F) that is used for research purposes.

symptoms:
Classical (cEDS)cEDS (formerly EDSI and EDSII) is associated with the primary problems described above, skin hyperextensibility, joint laxity, and fragile blood vessels. Scars are very thin, discolored, and stretch with time. Such paper-like (papyraceous) scarring occurs especially over prominent bony pressure points such as the knees, elbows, shins and forehead. Joint hypermobility accidents (subluxations and dislocations) are generally easily managed. Additional findings may include the formation of small, fleshy, skin growths called ‘molluscoid pseudotumors’ or hard, round, movable lumps under the skin called ‘calcified spheroids’. Finally, some individuals with this subtype may have a deformity of heart valves (especially the mitral/bicuspid valve between the atrium and the ventricle of the left side). The heart’s valves function to keep blood flowing in one direction. Weak valves may be overcome by the blood flow across their leaflets and prolapse, allowing blood to leak in the backwards direction. Valve dysfunction can result in remodeling of the heart’s architecture and with time congestive heart failure (pump insufficiency). Another complication cEDS patients may experience is dilatation of the aorta. The aorta is the major blood vessel coming immediately off the heart, responsible for directing oxygenated blood towards body tissues. In cEDS there is an increased risk also for aortic dissection. Blood vessel walls are made up of three layers (intima, media, and the adventitia). Dissection describes the separation of the intima from the media and adventitia. This complication can compromise blood supply to tissues including the heart. Aortic dissection is an immediate emergency that can result in acute heart failure. Patients should immediately seek medical attention for any tearing chest pains.
Classical-like (clEDS)clEDS is similar in clinical course to cEDS (described immediately above). Genetic causes of cEDS and clEDS differ (described below).
Cardiac-valvular type (cvEDS)cvEDS is a rare subtype of EDS wherein patients may have minor signs of EDS with severe defects to their aorta, requiring surgical interventions.
Vascular type (vEDS)vEDS (formerly EDSIV), can be identified at birth with noticeable clubfoot deformities and dislocation of the hips. In childhood, inguinal hernia (partial slip of intestine beyond the abdominal wall) and pneumothorax (collection of air between the lung and chest wall, impairing proper lung inflation) are commonly experienced and are indicative of this syndrome. Individuals with vEDS may also have abnormally decreased levels of fatty tissue under skin layers (subcutaneous adipose tissue) of the hands, arms, legs, feet, and face. Thus, some affected individuals may have a characteristic facial appearance. Cheeks are often taught and hollow. Lips and nose are often thin. Eyes are relatively prominent. In addition, skin of the hands and feet may appear prematurely aged (acrogeria). vEDS is particularly associated with arterial dissection and rupture, intestinal perforation, and uterine rupture. Arterial dissections are ruptures along the layers of tissue that comprise the thickness of the artery and may be spontaneous or preceded by an aneurysm (abnormal bulge in a vessel diameter) or arterio-venous malformation (AVM, abnormal connection between arteries and veins in the body). These bleeds can be life-threatening. One common AVM EDS patients experience is a carotid-cavernous sinus fistula. This is an abnormal connection between the carotid artery (a major offshoot of the aorta that supplies oxygenated blood to the brain) and the cavernous sinuses (a pool of deoxygenated blood deep within the skull behind the eyes). AVM can result in severe headaches, seizures, and increases a patient’s risk for stroke. There is an early onset of varicose veins, unusually widened, twisted veins visible under the skin that may be painful. vEDS carries a risk for spontaneous rupture of certain membranes and tissues. Acute pain in the abdominal or flank area may indicate arterial or intestinal rupture; such symptoms require immediate emergency medical attention. Pregnancies should be considered higher risk and watch closely for arterial and uterine ruptures. In addition, affected individuals may be prone to experiencing certain complications during and after surgical procedures, such as separation of the layers of a surgical wound (dehiscence). The median life expectancy for vEDS is 50, but with careful surveillance and management of complications this age can be well extended.
Hypermobility type (hEDS)hEDS (formerly EDSIII) comes with a defined set of complications to be managed but is generally a less severe form of the syndrome. For example, aortic root dilation is usually minimal and does not significantly increase the risk for dissections. The major complications to patients with hEDS are musculoskeletal in nature. Frequent joint dislocation and degenerative joint disease are common and associated with a baseline chronic pain, which affects both physical and psychological wellbeing. Problems with the autonomic nervous system, responsible for regulating body functions and the fight-or-flight response, are common. For example, patients often experience orthostatic intolerance, significant lightheadedness on standing, due to a slowed response by their circulatory system to compensation against blood pressure and flow changes with shifts in body position. Bowel disorders are also more common with this condition, especially functional dyspepsia (indigestion), and irritable bowel syndrome. Patients with EDS hypermobility type have also frequently reported psychological impairment and mood problems.
Arthrochalasia type (aEDS)aEDS (formerly EDSVII, A and B) is associated with the lifelong risk for the dislocation of multiple major joints concurrently. This condition makes achieving mobility significantly challenging. It is important to identify as early in life as possible as it carries consequences of physical disability with older age. Newborns may demonstrate severe muscular hypotonia and a bilateral dislocation of the hips at birth and might be difficult to distinguish from kEDS (described below).
Dermatosparaxis type (dEDS)Patient with dEDS (formerly EDSVIIC) tend to show a set of common body features. These include a short stature and finger length, loose skin of the face, with comparatively full eyelids, blue-tinged whites of the eye (sclera), skin folds in the upper eyelids (epicanthal folds), downward slanting outer corners of the eyes (palpebral fissures) and a small jaw (micrognathia). A major complication of dEDS is herniation, the improper displacement of an organ through the tissues holding it in proper position. Hernias are especially common after certain surgeries, for example wherein there is an incision into the muscles of the abdomen. Due to the lengthy wound-healing process, intestinal contents may bulge through incisions. Patients with dEDS are also prone to ruptures in the diaphragm and bladder. For families with a suspected history of dEDS type, the parents of newborns should be advised that their child’s soft spots in the skull (fontanelles) may be delayed in their closure.
Kyphoscoliotic type (kEDS)kEDS is accompanied by scleral fragility, increasing the risk for rupture of the white globe of the eye. Microcornea, near-sightedness (myopia), glaucoma and detachment of the nerve-rich membrane in the back of the eye (retina) are common and can result in vision loss. Patients experiencing floaters, flashes or sudden curtains falling across their visual field should seek immediate medical attention. kEDS (formerly EDSVI) can be evident at birth. Newborns may demonstrate severe muscular weakness (hypotonia) or abnormal spinal rotations and curvatures (scoliosis). Despite progressive scoliosis, the survival of patients with kEDS is unaffected. The most severely affected adults may lose the ability to walk by their 20s-30s and it becomes important to watch that their scoliosis does not begin to impede normal breathing patterns.
Brittle cornea syndrome (BCS)BCS is a variant of EDS that also involves the eyes. People with variant risk ruptures to the cornea following minor injuries with scarring, degeneration of the cornea (keratoconus), and protrusion of the cornea (keratoglobus). Patients may have blue sclera.
Spondylodysplastic type (spEDS)spEDS, previously spondylocheirodysplastic type, describes an EDS variant with skeletal dysmorphology. It primarily involves the spine and the hands. Clinical presentation can include stunted growth, short stature, protuberant eyes with bluish sclera, wrinkled skin of the palms, atrophy of muscles at the base of the thumb (thenar muscles), and tapering fingers.
Musculocontractural type (mcEDS)mcEDS is characterized by progressive multisystem complications. This subtype is especially associated with developmental delay and muscular weakness plus hypotonia. Patients often have facial and cranial structural defects, congenital contractures of the fingers, severe kyphoscoliosis, muscular hypotonia, club foot deformity, and ocular problems.
Myopathic type (mEDS)mEDS is characterized by muscle hypotonia evident at birth with muscles that do not function properly (myopathy). Scoliosis and sensorineural hearing impairment may accompany this condition. It shares many features with the kyphoscoliotic form of EDS.
Periodontal type (pEDS)pEDS type (formerly EDS VII) has findings that include disease of the tissues surrounding and supporting the teeth (periodontal disease), potentially resulting in premature tooth loss.
Some subtypes of EDS included within the original disease classification system have been redefined and are no longer part of the revised categorization (eg: previously known as EDS type IX has been redefined to occipital horn syndrome and EDSXI is now known as familial hypermobility syndrome). For more information on these disorders, please see the “Related Disorders” section of this report below.

