Eisenmenger Syndrome

synonyms:
Eisenmenger complexEisenmenger diseaseEisenmenger physiologyEisenmenger reaction

overview:
General Discussion
Eisenmenger syndrome is a rare condition that affects both the heart and the lungs.  The disease is characterized by high blood pressure and abnormal blood flow through the heart. The type of high blood pressure experienced by affected individuals is called pulmonary artery hypertension, which affects the blood vessels in the lungs and the right heart chambers. Generally, patients with Eisenmenger syndrome are born with a heart defect (congenital heart defect) that was not corrected with surgery or other intervention at an early age.
The normal heart has four chambers. The two upper chambers, known as atria, are separated from each other by a fibrous partition, known as the atrial septum. The two lower chambers are known as ventricles and are separated from each other by the ventricular septum. Valves connect the atria (left and right) to their respective ventricles. The valves allow for blood to be pumped through the chambers. Blood travels from the right ventricle through the pulmonary artery to the lungs where it receives oxygen. The blood returns to the heart through pulmonary veins and enters the left ventricle. The left ventricle sends the now oxygen-filled blood into the main artery of the body (aorta). The aorta carries the blood to the body.
Individuals with Eisenmenger syndrome often have a ventricular septal defect or a “hole in the heart” between the left and right pumping chambers in the heart. This results in significant shunting of blood from the left side of the heart to the right at birth, which progresses to pulmonary vascular disease. Once pulmonary vascular disease has developed, the heart defect is no longer repairable.  Eventually blood flow through the defect (shunt) can become bidirectional, which leads to cyanosis (reduced oxygen concentration in the blood).

symptoms:
The specific symptoms of Eisenmenger syndrome vary greatly from person to person. Although the heart defect is present at birth, Eisenmenger syndrome with cyanosis often develops around puberty, but may develop earlier or later depending on the location and severity of the congenital heart defect. The symptoms and complications result from a combination of the effects of the heart defect, reduced oxygen in the blood and high pressures in the lungs.
The most notable symptom is called cyanosis, which is the bluish discoloration of the skin and mucous membranes. Individuals affected with Eisenmenger syndrome develop cyanosis, particularly of the lips, fingers and toes, which is more pronounced during physical efforts. Patients typically have an increased number of blood cells (red blood cells or erythrocytes) that transport oxygen to the body (i.e., erythrocytosis), compensating for the inadequate oxygen supply to tissues.
Additional signs may include rounding of the tips of the fingers and toes (clubbing), shortness of breath, fatigue, lethargy or arrhythmias. Those with Eisenmenger syndrome are also at higher risk for stroke, coughing up blood (hemoptysis) or gout.

