Elephantiasis

overview:
Elephantiasis is a condition characterized by gross enlargement of an area of the body, especially the limbs. Other areas commonly affected include the external genitals. Elephantiasis is caused by obstruction of the lymphatic system, which results in the accumulation of a fluid called lymph in the affected areas.
Functioning as part of the immune system, the lymphatic system helps to protect the body against infection and disease. It consists of a network of tubular channels (lymph vessels) that drain a thin watery fluid known as lymph from different areas of the body into the bloodstream. Obstruction of these vessels first results in lymphedema, and then can slowly progress to massive swelling and gross enlargement characteristic of elephantiasis.
In areas where filariasis is endemic, the most common cause of elephantiasis is a parasitic disease known as lymphatic filariasis and, in the medical literature, the terms lymphatic filariasis and elephantiasis should not be used interchangeably. In most areas, the lymphatic damage associated with elephantiasis has other causes including certain sexually transmitted diseases (e.g., lymphogranuloma venereum); tuberculosis; an infectious disease called leishmaniasis; repeated streptococcal infections; leprosy; and environmental factors such as exposure to certain minerals (e.g., silica). In some cases, no cause can be identified (idiopathic).

symptoms:
The initial symptom of lymphatic dysfunction is a mild edema, which can gradually progress to elephantiasis if not treated.
The main symptom of elephantiasis is gross enlargement and swelling of an area of the body because of the accumulation of fluid. The arms and legs are the areas most often affected. An entire arm or leg may swell to several times its normal size resembling the thick, round appearance of an elephant’s leg. The skin of the affected areas usually develops a dry, thickened, pebbly appearance and may become ulcerated, pitted and darkened (hyperkeratosis). Fever, chills, and a general feeling of ill health (malaise) may also be present.
Elephantiasis may also affect the male and female external genital organs. In a male, there may be enlargement of the scrotum, and the penis may be retracted under skin which has become thickened, nonelastic, hot and painful. The spermatic cords may thicken. Affected individuals may experience pain and a burning sensation.
The external parts of the female genital organs (vulva) may also be affected by elephantiasis. A tumorous mass covered by thickened and ulcerated skin may develop between the thighs and may be accompanied by enlarged lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy) of the legs. In some women the breasts may become enlarged.
Underlying damage to the lymphatic system may leave individuals susceptible to secondary bacterial and fungal infections that can greatly worsen the condition. Although the legs, arms and external genitalia are most often affected, elephantiasis can affect any area of the body.

