Ellis-Van Creveld Syndrome

synonyms:
chondroectodermal dysplasiaEVCmesoectodermal dysplasia

overview:
Ellis-Van Creveld syndrome is a rare genetic disorder that is mainly characterized by short limbs, additional fingers and/or toes (polydactyly), abnormal development of fingernails and, in over half of the patients, congenital heart defects. Nearly 50% of patients die by 18 months of age from cardiopulmonary complications. Motor development and intelligence are usually normal.This disorder is caused by variants in several different genes including theEVC1andEVC2genes and occasionally theDYNC2LI1,DYNC2H1,GLI1,WDR35,PRKACA,PRKACBandSMOgenes. Inheritance is autosomal recessivein most cases.EVC syndrome caused by variants inPRKACAorPRKACBis inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.Treatment is symptom-specific and generally requires a team of medical professionals.

symptoms:
Individuals with Ellis-Van Creveld syndrome typically have arms and legs that are abnormally short while the head and trunk are normal. Shortened length between the neck and abdomen and a narrow chest may occur. Extra fingers (polydactyly) are present in all patients with this condition and both hands are usually affected. Feet are affected in 1/3 of patients. Abnormal development (dysplasia) of fingernails, toenails, hair, teeth and inner lining of the mouth (oral mucosa) may occur.
More than 50% of the patients with Ellis-Van Creveld syndrome are born with malformations of the heart. The most common heart defect is an abnormal opening in the wall between the two upper heart chambers (atrial septal defect). Other types of heart defects have also been reported including ventricular septal defects and patent ductus arteriosus.
Some males with this condition have been described with undescended testicles (cryptorchidism) or an abnormally located opening of the urine canal in the penis (epispadias). Abnormalities in the chest wall, spine and respiratory system have also been reported.
Other frequently reported symptoms include:
Overall
Restriction of fetal growth (intrauterine growth delay)
Eyes, Mouth and Teeth
Abnormality of the tongue mucous membrane (oral frenum)Abnormality of the incisor teeth (conical incisor)Underdeveloped teeth (microdontia) or missing teeth (hypodontia)
Heart and Lungs
Underdeveloped lungs (hypoplasia)
Urinary Tract
Abnormality of the kidney (renal anomaly)Abnormality of the urine duct (ureteral anomalies)Abnormal opening of the urine canal on the underside of the penis (hypospadias)
Skeletal
Fusion of the wrist bones (capitate-hamate fusion)Abnormality of the pelvic bone (pelvic girdle)
Less common symptoms include:
Abnormal female genitaliaAbnormal elbow positioning (cubitus valgus)Delayed tooth eruptionDelayed skeletal maturationWide ureter (hydroureter)Intellectual disabilityAbnormality of the lips (thin vermilion border)

