Encephalocele

synonyms:
cephalocelecraniocelecranium bifidum

overview:
Encephaloceles are rare neurological birth defects characterized by sac-like protrusions of brain tissue, the membranes that cover the brain (meninges) and the clear, watery fluid within the tissues that surround the brain (cerebrospinal fluid) through openings in the skull. Encephaloceles are usually congenital (present from birth) and result from the incomplete closing of the neural tube, a structure during fetal development that folds and normally becomes the brain and spinal cord. In some cases, encephaloceles may be acquired from trauma, tumors or injury caused by medical treatment. Surgery is usually necessary to treat encephaloceles.
The exact cause of encephaloceles is unknown, but the disorder most likely results from the combination of several environmental and genetic factors (multifactorial).

symptoms:
The signs of an encephalocele depend on the location of the lesion. Some are present as a skin-covered mass near the midline in the head that is filled brain tissue and cerebrospinal fluid. Some encephaloceles protrude into spaces such as the nasal sinuses or the base of the skull and may not have external signs.
The symptoms of an encephalocele can vary from one individual to another depending upon many different factors including size, amount of brain tissue protruding from the skull and location and type of tissue that is in the lesion. Encephaloceles that protrude from the skull are usually present at the back of the head, occipital or suboccipital, or near the front of the head. The symptoms of the encephalocele are usually not directly a result of the lesion itself, but the changes that accompany the lesion in the underlying brain because of the loss of brain tissue or effects on the underlying brain structure and development. Patients with encephaloceles can develop seizures, microcephaly (smaller than normal head circumference) and developmental delay. The tissue that is in the encephalocele typically becomes scarred and is no longer functional. If there is an abnormal connection to the outside, such as can occur with anterior encephaloceles between the eyes or in the nasal cavity, lesions can present with nasal obstruction, leakage of cerebrospinal fluid from the nose (cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea) or even infection (meningitis). Because encephaloceles protrude through the skull, depending on where the protrusion is and the gap in the skull in that location, the lesion can lead to significant skull defects, facial differences or abnormally large distance between the eyes (hypertelorism).
Encephaloceles can result in developmental delays, intellectual disability, learning disabilities and growth delays. Vision impairment, inflammation of the membranes that cover the brain and spinal cord (meningitis, and uncoordinated voluntary movements (ataxia) are also observed. Hydrocephalus, a condition in which excess cerebrospinal fluid in the skull causes pressure on the brain, may occur as well. Hydrocephalus occurs in 60-90% of patients with posterior encephaloceles. Affected individuals may also experience motor abnormalities due to effects on the underlying brain responsible for controlling movement or to increased muscle tone and stiffness (spastic paraplegia).
It is important to note that not all affected individuals have all the symptoms discussed above and some children may have normal intelligence, while others experience intellectual disability. The effects are thought to be due to the amount and type of brain tissue that is involved and how the development of the brain tissue not in the encephalocele was affected. In some patients, particularly those that involve the brain stem, these lesions can be life threatening due to effects on breathing and the heart.  Parents should talk to their child’s physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.

