Endocardial Fibroelastosis

synonyms:
EFEElastic tissue hyperplasiaEndocardial DysplasiaEndocardial sclerosisFetal Endomyocardial FibrosisSubendocardial Sclerosis

overview:
Endocardial fibroelastosis (EFE) is a rare heart disorder that affects infants and children. It is characterized by a thickening within the muscular lining of the heart chambers due to an increase in the amount of supporting connective tissue (inelastic collagen) and elastic fibers. The normal heart has four chambers. Two chambers, known as atria, are separated from each other by a partition called the atrial septum. The other two chambers, known as ventricles, are also separated by a septum. Valves connect the atria (left and right) to their respective ventricles.
The symptoms of endocardial fibroelastosis are related to the overgrowth of fibrous tissues causing abnormal enlargement of the heart (cardiac hypertrophy), especially the left ventricle. Impaired heart and lung function eventually lead to congestive heart failure. Endocardial fibroelastosis may occur for no apparent reason (sporadic) or may be inherited as an X-linked (EFE2) or autosomal recessive (EFE1) genetic trait.

symptoms:
The symptoms of endocardial fibroelastosis begin rapidly, generally between the ages of 4 and 12 months.  Symptoms are due to the overgrowth of fibrous tissue and thickening of the lining of the hearts’ chambers (i.e., endocardium and subendocardium), especially the left ventricle.  In some very rare cases of EFE, the left ventricle is small (hypoplastic) or of normal size and the right ventricle is enlarged.
The most common symptoms of endocardial fibroelastosis include difficulty breathing (dyspnea), breathlessness, grunting sounds during breathing, coughing, irritability, weakness, and/or a pale facial appearance (pallor). Other symptoms may include fatigue, failure to thrive, increased sweating, an abnormal blue skin coloration on the feet and hands (peripheral cyanosis), and/or wheezing.
Infants and children with endocardial fibroelastosis may have unusual chest sounds that can be heard during a physician’s examination with a stethoscope.  Bubbling, moist sounds (rales) suggest fluid accumulation in the airways.  Unusual heart sounds (murmurs) are also typically present in children with EFE.  Excessive backward flow of blood from the left ventricle, through the mitral valve and into the left atrium (mitral regurgitation) is also a common finding in children with this disorder.  Symptoms of mitral regurgitation may include heart palpitation and intolerance to exercise.
Life-threatening complications associated with endocardial fibroelastosis may develop, including an abnormally rapid heartbeat (tachycardia), irregular heart rhythms (atrial and ventricular arrhythmias), and/or congestive heart failure (congestive cardiomyopathy).

