Enthesitis-Related Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis

synonyms:
ERAjuvenile spondyloarthropathyjuvenile enthesitis-related arthritisenthesitis related arthritis, juvenileenthesitis-related arthritisenthesitis-related JIA

overview:
Summary
Enthesitis-related juvenile idiopathic arthritis is a subtype of juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) that is characterized by both arthritis and inflammation of an enthesis site (the point at which a ligament, tendon or joint capsule attaches to the bone). Signs and symptoms generally develop in late childhood or early adolescence and include pain, stiffness and swelling in joints and at the enthesis. The most affected parts of the body are the knee and the back of the ankle (Achilles tendon). JIA is idiopathic, meaning that the underlying cause of the disease is unknown. It is very rare for more than one member of a family to have juvenile arthritis; however, research suggests that having a family member with juvenile arthritis or any autoimmune disease may increase the risk of having juvenile arthritis. Treatment usually involves different types of medications to help manage symptoms and/or physical therapy.
Enthesitis-related juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is a form of juvenile arthritis that involves joint pain and stiffness, as well as enthesitis (inflammation where a ligament or tendon attaches to bone). Pain and stiffness are common in the joints of the lower body, but it can sometimes also happen in the spine and sacroiliac joints. Some children may also have inflammation of the front portion of the eye (called acute anterior uveitis). Enthesitis-related JIA most commonly affects boys and is related to certain genetic risk factors and a family history of similar conditions. It can be diagnosed by a pediatric rheumatologist. Treatment is mostly through medications that reduce inflammation and help to manage pain and stiffness of joints.

symptoms:
The symptoms of enthesitis-related juvenile idiopathic arthritis vary from person to person. Initial symptoms often include pain and stiffness in the joints of the lower body, especially knees, hips, ankles and feet. Joint pain, stiffness, and swelling are usually asymmetric (affecting each side of the body differently), and children can have trouble with walking as the joints of the lower body are commonly affected. While joint pain and stiffness may come and go initially, they can last for longer periods over time as the condition progresses. Pain and stiffness are often worse in the morning and can get better with movement. Enthesitis-related JIA is more likely to have pain and stiffness in the hips and midfoot area than other forms of JIA.
Enthesitis is another common symptom and is marked by pain or swelling at the sites where tendons or ligaments attach to bone. This usually happens at the knee where the patellar tendon attaches to the kneecap, at the bottom of the foot where the plantar fascia attaches to the bones of the feet and at sites on the top and bottom of the heel, although other sites can be affected as well.
Some children with enthesitis-related JIA develop acute uveitis, which is inflammation of the front part of the eye. Acute uveitis causes eye pain, redness and sensitivity to light, usually in one eye. Uveitis may occur multiple times and complications from recurrent uveitis include scarring of the iris (colored part of the eye), cataracts (clouding of the lens of the eye) and calcium deposition in the cornea (clear part of the anterior eye), although these are rare when flares are quickly treated.
Several years after the condition starts, some children may develop inflammation of the spine or sacroiliac joint (where the bottom of the spine (sacrum) meets the pelvis (ilium)). These children may have lower back pain, buttock pain and stiffness of the back which is worsened by long periods of inactivity. Back pain is seen in some children who progress to develop a condition called juvenile ankylosing spondylitis which is another kind of inflammatory arthritis that affects the spine. Therefore, identifying arthritis of the spine early on is important.
Children with enthesitis-related JIA may also experience symptoms such as rash (which may affect any part of the body), fever and fatigue. However, these symptoms, though common, are not specific to enthesitis-related JIA and may be seen in many other conditions.

