Eosinophilic Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis

synonyms:
allergic angiitis and granulomatosisallergic granulomatosisallergic granulomatosis and angiitisChurg-Strauss vasculitisChurg-Strauss syndromeCSSEGPA

overview:
Summary
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA) is a rare immune disorder of the blood vessels that can affect multiple organ systems, especially the lungs. The disorder is characterized by the presence of white blood cells called eosinophils (hypereosinophilia) in the blood and tissues resulting in inflammation of blood vessels (vasculitis) and the development of inflammatory nodular lesions called granulomas (granulomatosis).
It can develop over time with many affected individuals presenting initially with a history of nasal symptoms suggestive of allergies or sinusitis. In addition, worsening asthma and other associated lung abnormalities (i.e., pulmonary infiltrates) often precede the development of more severe symptoms and findings seen in EGPA. Asthma, a chronic respiratory disorder, is characterized by inflammation and sensitivity of the airways due to narrowing of the airways, or obstruction due to mucus. When severely affected by eosinophils in the airways, in the case of EGPA, it can cause breathing difficulties (dyspnea), cough, a high-pitched whistling sound while breathing (wheezing) and/or other symptoms and findings.
Nonspecific findings associated with EGPA typically include flu-like symptoms, such as fever, a general feeling of weakness and fatigue (malaise), loss of appetite (anorexia), weight loss, joint pain (arthralgia) and muscle pain (myalgia). Additional symptoms and findings vary depending on the specific organ systems affected. Other organ involvement can occur. For example, the gastrointestinal tract can be affected by eosinophils and cause symptoms of abdominal pain, nausea/vomiting and rarely more severe symptoms. The skin may be involved and include red bumps or rashes, or hives. The nerves outside the central nervous system (peripheral nerves) can cause feelings of numbness or tingling in the arms or legs. The heart and kidneys may also be affected. EGPA can occur both in children and in older adults; however, the average age of patients diagnosed with EGPA is 40 years old.
Often, people with EGPA have a long “prodrome” of disease occurring over months to years, though some may present acutely with serious organ damage and potentially life-threatening complications. EGPA is a chronic disease without a known cause. Research has shown that abnormal functioning of the immune system plays an important role. Available treatments are used to put patients in remission by suppressing the immune system and reducing the inflammation associated with EGPA.
Introduction
EGPA was first described by two pathologists, Jacob Churg and Lotte Strauss, for whom the disease was previously named when it was referred to as Churg-Strauss syndrome. In 1951, these physicians noticed that some of their patients had symptoms of severe asthma, fever, high levels of eosinophils in their blood and vasculitis that involved small- and medium-sized blood vessels and the formation of granulomas, which occur from a persistent inflammatory response.

symptoms:
Because multiple organ systems can potentially be affected, the specific symptoms of EGPA vary widely from person to person, including in their severity, duration and onset. Since different organ systems will be affected in different people, all the symptoms discussed below will not occur in every patient. Classically the disorder was separated into three distinct phases – prodromal, eosinophilic and vasculitic; however, these phases may or may not occur sequentially or in all individuals.
Individuals with EGPA often have allergic manifestations including late-onset asthma that may start with coughing, wheezing, shortness of breath (dyspnea) and breathlessness. In individuals who have asthma, the condition may become worse and may either not respond to inhalers for asthma or become more resistant to treatment over time. Some affected individuals develop nasal allergies (allergic rhinitis), a common condition in which allergic inflammation of the mucous membrane of the nose causes a runny nose, sneezing, itching and nasal congestion, Allergic rhinitis is a chronic, recurring condition. In some people, repeated episodes of sinus inflammation may occur (sinusitis). Sinusitis may result in facial pain or a feeling of fullness. Chronic inflammation of the mucous membrane in the nose may cause inflammatory tissue growth called polyps within the nose. These polyps may contain large amounts of eosinophils, and cause blockage of the sinus tracts, preventing mucus from draining normally out of the sinuses. Other symptoms that can occur early in the development of EGPA include nonspecific, constitutional symptoms, such as feeling tired or having muscle or joint pain. Respiratory symptoms are usually the first signs of EGPA and can precede the development of vasculitis by as little as six months or by many years.
In individuals with EGPA, abnormally high numbers of eosinophils (hypereosinophilia) in the blood, are produced. Eosinophils are a type of white blood cell that may be produced in response to allergies to environmental allergens, medications, or other triggers. They may also be elevated during infections such as fungal or parasitic infections. During the eosinophilic phase of EGPA, eosinophils accumulate in various tissues of the body, which can include the lungs, skin and gastrointestinal tract and nervous system.
EGPA may affect the blood vessels and cause widespread inflammation (vasculitis). It is not known whether vasculitis can be prevented by effective treatment during the eosinophilic phase of the disease. Sometimes, chronic vasculitis can cause narrowing of affected blood vessels, blocking or slowing the flow of blood to various organs. Sometimes accumulation of blood in these areas can cause a clot (thrombosis) to develop. In addition, inflamed blood vessels may become thin and fragile, potentially rupturing and bleeding into surrounding tissue, or the blood vessel wall may become weak and develop a bulge (aneurysm). Neurological symptoms are a typical finding in vasculitis due to EGPA.
The symptoms of EGPA vary depending on the organ systems involved. Most individuals develop asthma-like symptoms usually before the onset of other symptoms. However, some people develop symptoms of vasculitis before they develop respiratory symptoms.
Individuals with EGPA often develop nonspecific symptoms that may be associated with various illnesses including fatigue, fever, weight loss, night sweats, abdominal pain, cough, joint pain (arthralgia), muscle pain (myalgia) and a general feeling of ill health (malaise). Swollen lymph nodes and generalized weakness have also been reported. Inner ear infections with fluid buildup (serous otitis media) may also occur and can result in hearing loss. The moist membrane lining the surface of the eyelids (conjunctiva) may be inflamed as well, as well as the nerves behind the eyes
Neurological symptoms in individuals with EGPA are common. A condition called mononeuritis multiplex, in which two or more nerves in separate areas of the peripheral nervous system are affected, may occur. The peripheral nervous system refers to the nerves found outside the central nervous system (i.e., outside the brain and spinal cord). Associated symptoms depend on the specific nerves involved. Common symptoms are pain, tingling or numbness and eventually weakness and muscle wasting in the hands and feet (extremities). Disease affecting multiple nerves in the same area of the body (polyneuropathy) may also occur. If EGPA is left untreated, serious neurological complications may develop including in the brain (stroke).
Approximately half of individuals with EGPA develop skin abnormalities caused by the accumulation of eosinophils in skin tissue. Symptoms may include the development of purplish skin lesions due to bleeding (hemorrhaging) into tissues under the skin (purpura), a rash with hives (urticaria) and small bumps (nodules). Gastrointestinal involvement results in abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, blood in the stools and inflammation of the membrane lining the gastrointestinal tract and may involve the stomach, small bowel or colon (i.e. gastritis, enteritis, or colitis).
Individuals with EGPA may develop heart abnormalities including inflammation of the fibrous sac (pericardium) that surrounds the heart (percarditis), inflammation of the muscular wall (myocardium) of the heart (myocarditis), heart failure and inflammation of the coronary arteries resulting in heart muscle damage (infarction). Symptoms associated with heart disease include fatigue, shortness of breath, irregular heart rhythm, chest pain and fainting episodes. Heart abnormalities may be caused by inflammation of the blood vessels (vasculitis) and the development of inflammation (edema) or nodular lesions (granulomas) within the heart tissue. Patients may also develop pericarditis or pericardial effusions from inflammatory fluid collections around the outside lining of the heart. Disruption of the nervous system from neurological involvement may also be associated with irregular heart rhythms (cardiac dysrhythmia) noted to occur in EGPA.
The kidneys can become involved in some people, resulting in glomerulonephritis, a condition characterized by inflammation and degeneration of the tiny clusters of blood vessels (capillaries) called renal glomeruli that filter the blood as it passes through the kidneys. Glomerulonephritis results in an impaired ability to remove waste and fluid in the blood, which then causes buildup of toxins in the bloodstream, or swelling or fluid buildup in the tissues or other organs. Although it is an extremely rare occurrence in individuals with EGPA, life-threatening kidney failure can occur.

