Eosinophilic Fasciitis

synonyms:
diffuse eosinophilic fasciitisShulman syndrome

overview:
Summary
Eosinophilic fasciitis is a rare disorder characterized by inflammation of the tough band of fibrous tissue beneath the skin (fascia). The arms and legs are most often affected. Inflammation is caused by the abnormal accumulation of certain white blood cells including eosinophils in the fascia. Eosinophilic fasciitis eventually causes the skin to swell and slowly thicken and harden (induration). The disorder most commonly affects middle-aged adults. The specific symptoms and severity of eosinophilic fasciitis can vary from one individual to another. The exact cause of eosinophilic fasciitis is unknown.
Introduction
Eosinophilic fasciitis, also known as Shulman syndrome, is named after the physician who, in 1974, was the first to report on the disorder in the medical literature. Some researchers believe that eosinophilic fasciitis is a variant of scleroderma (systemic sclerosis), an autoimmune connective tissue disorder characterized by hardening of the skin. However, these entities can usually be distinguished by their clinical characteristics.

symptoms:
Although researchers have been able to establish a clear syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about eosinophilic fasciitis is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified cases, the lack of large clinical studies, and the possibility of other unknown influencing factors prevent physicians from developing an accurate picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below.
The onset of eosinophilic fasciitis is often sudden (acute), developing over a few days or weeks. In these cases, the disorder may progress rapidly. Less often, a less severe form of disorder that progresses more slowly can develop. In many cases, an episode of eosinophilic fasciitis follows strenuous physical exercise or activity.
Specific symptoms and severity can vary greatly from one individual to another. Both sides of the body are affected in most cases, but rare cases where only one side of the body is affected have also been reported (unilateral eosinophilic fasciitis).
Initial symptoms associated with eosinophilic fasciitis include pain and swelling and inflammation of the skin, especially of the arms and legs. The arms and forearms are affected more often than the legs and thighs. The hands and feet are usually unaffected. Affected areas may initially become tender. Affected individuals may develop characteristic shallow grooves or furrows in the skin that run along the paths of underlying veins (venous grooving). Affected skin may become reddened (erythema) and warm and gradually thicken and harden (induration). Eventually, the skin may lose its elasticity and develop a characteristic woody, puckered, or orange peel texture. These progressive skin changes can potentially limit the mobility of the arms and legs. In some cases, the joints in the arms and legs may become stuck in unusual positions (contractures). Other areas that may be rarely affected include the face, abdomen, buttocks, and chest. In some cases, localized areas of scleroderma (morphea) may develop.
Some affected individuals may develop nonspecific symptoms including fatigue, weight loss, fever, and a general feeling of ill health (malaise) or a general lack of strength (asthenia). Although muscle strength is usually unaffected, muscle pain (myalgia) and inflammation of the joints (arthritis) often occurs. Bone pain has also been reported.
Some cases of eosinophilic fasciitis may be associated with carpal tunnel syndrome, a condition caused by compression of peripheral nerves affecting one or both hands. It is characterized by a sensation of numbness, tingling, burning and/or pain in the hand and wrist. Symptoms are slowly progressive and may eventually make it difficult to form a fist or grasp small objects.
The internal organs (viscera) may be affected in some cases, although only mildly. Blood (hematological) abnormalities have been reported including low levels of circulating red blood cells (anemia) and low levels of circulating platelets (thrombocytopenia). Anemia may cause tiredness, increased need for sleep, weakness, lightheadedness, dizziness, irritability, headaches, pale skin color, and difficulty breathing. Thrombocytopenia may cause individuals to be more susceptible to excessive bruising following minimal injury and to spontaneous bleeding from the mucous membranes, especially those of the gums and nose.

