Eosinophilia-Myalgia Syndrome

synonyms:
EMS

overview:
Summary
Eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome is a rare disorder that affects multiple organ systems of the body including the muscles, skin, and lungs. The onset of the disorder is often abrupt and the specific symptoms can vary greatly from one person to another. Common symptoms include muscle pain (myalgia), muscle weakness, cramping, skin rashes, difficulty breathing (dyspnea) and fatigue. Affected individuals have elevated levels of certain white blood cells known as eosinophils in the various tissues of the body, a condition known as eosinophilia. Eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome can potentially cause severe, disabling complications and even death.
Introduction
During the autumn of 1989, an epidemic of a new disease occurred in the United States. The illness was characterized by elevations of blood eosinophils (a type of white blood cell) and myalgia (severe muscle pain) and was termed the eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome (EMS). The disease was first recognized in October 1989 when physicians in New Mexico identified three women with similar clinical findings: all three had consumed manufactured L-tryptophan supplements prior to the onset of their illness. (L-tryptophan is an essential amino acid found naturally in various foods, and L-tryptophan can also be manufactured.) These patients’ findings were publicized by the local news media and, soon thereafter, additional cases of the same illness were identified throughout the USA and in several other countries.
Epidemiological studies were initiated within days of discovery of the epidemic in early November 1989 by state health departments in New Mexico and Minnesota, and these studies demonstrated a strong association between the consumption of manufactured L-tryptophan and the onset of EMS. A national surveillance program was initiated by the United States Centers for Disease Control (CDC) to investigate the new disease. On  November 11, 1989, the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued a nationwide warning advising consumers to stop consumption of manufactured L-tryptophan food products and requested a nationwide recall of all L-tryptophan supplements sold over-the-counter.
After the removal of L-tryptophan supplements from the consumer markets, the number of new cases of EMS diminished rapidly. Nevertheless, more than 1,500 people were affected by the illness and 37 deaths were attributed to the disease. In many cases the disease struck patients in the prime of life and caused severe, debilitating neurological damage. It is likely that the toll from the disease would have been considerably greater if not for the alertness of physicians who linked the new disease to manufactured L-tryptophan, and for the epidemiological investigations by the state Departments of Health and the CDC, plus the prompt recall initiated by the FDA of products containing L-tryptophan. However, while the epidemiological and chemical investigations indicate that the epidemic of EMS was caused by contaminated L-tryptophan supplements, the precise contaminant causing the disease is still unknown.
In 1994 Congress passed the Dietary Health Supplement Education Act (DHSEA), which President Clinton signed into law. This law greatly weakened FDA’s ability to regulate dietary supplements. As a result, manufactured L-tryptophan is legally sold again.
There had been isolated cases of EMS diagnosed before the epidemic of 1989 and there have been after, as well. The isolated cases of EMS diagnosed before the epidemic of 1989 were attributed to L-tryptophan dietary supplements. The isolated cases of EMS that are currently being diagnosed are attributed to L-tryptophan or 5-HTP dietary supplements. During the time that L-tryptophan was taken off the market, the closely related dietary supplement 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) was used as a substitute, and it continues to be so used. The amino acid 5-HTP is found on the metabolic pathway that converts the essential amino acid L-tryptophan to the neurotransmitter serotonin. Because serotonin helps to regulate sleep and mood (among other things), it is thought that ingesting L-tryptophan or 5-HTP, thus purportedly improving sleep and mood, will increase this neurotransmitter.
The National Eosinophilia Myalgia Syndrome Network(NEMSN), for the past several years, has also been receiving reports from people who have developed EMS-like symptoms soon after ingesting manufactured L-tryptophan, 5-HTP, or other products containing L-tryptophan or 5-HTP, such as certain body building products, weight loss supplements, and sleep aids.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome can vary greatly from one person to another. In most cases, the onset of the disorder is rapid.
The initial symptoms associated with eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome include breathing difficulties such as shortness of breath (dyspnea) and muscle aches, cramping and spasms. Muscle pain (myalgia) also occurs and may become progressively worse. Eventually, muscle pain may become incapacitating making it difficult to walk or perform daily activities. The muscles of the legs, back and shoulders are most often affected. Muscle spasms may be triggered by movement or exercise. Muscle weakness usually does not occur until later in the course of the disorder.
Additional symptoms that often occur during this earlier phase of eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome include cough, fever, fatigue, joint pain (arthralgia), swelling due to the abnormal accumulation of fluid (edema), and a sensation of numbness or tingling, most often in the hands, feet, arms or legs. Affected individuals may also develop a rash that can be extremely itchy (pruritus). This initial (acute) phase of the disorder usually lasts approximately 3-6 months.
After this initial phase, affected individuals experience chronic symptoms that can affect several different organ systems of the body. The skin is the organ most often affected and may slowly swell, thicken and harden (eosinophilic fasciitis). The arms and legs are most often affected. Some individuals develop small areas of hair loss (alopecia).
The central nervous system becomes involved in some cases and can cause decreased feeling (sensation) in the hands, increased sensation (hyperesthesia) in the back and arms or legs, progressive muscle weakness, bladder dysfunction, changes in mood or behavior and cognitive deficits such as memory loss, difficulty concentrating and difficulty communicating. However, the relationship between cognitive deficits or behavioral changes and eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome is controversial. Some researchers believe these problems arise from severe pain, depression and disturbances in sleep patterns associated with eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome and not from the direct, underlying effects of the disorder.
Additional symptoms can occur during the chronic phase of eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome although they occur less often than the abovementioned symptoms. Such symptoms include heart (cardiac) abnormalities including inflammation of the heart muscle (myocarditis), irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias) and palpitations. Some individuals may have gastrointestinal symptoms including nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and abdominal pain.
Muscle pain, the characteristic finding of the acute phase, also occurs during the chronic phase of the disorder, although it often comes and goes (remission and relapse). Fatigue, which can be profound, also occurs during the chronic phase. Muscle cramps and shortness of breath are also present.

