Epilepsy with Eyelid Myoclonia

synonyms:
Eyelid myoclonia with or without absenceJeavons syndrome

overview:
Epilepsy with eyelid myoclonia (EEM) is a genetic generalized epilepsy syndrome with an average age of onset between 6-8 years. Patients typically present in childhood with prominent eyelid myoclonia, which is a jerking or flickering up of the eyelids associated with the eyes rolling up. This typically happens many times a day. Patients may be misdiagnosed, as eyelid myoclonia may be mistaken as a tic or a behavioral reaction and these children are often referred to a psychologist or psychiatrist. Eyelid myoclonia may be associated with absence seizures and eye closure sensitivity, and other seizure types may also be present. Intellectual ability and development are typically normal, but school difficulties and attention problems may occur. The underlying cause is thought to be genetic, and studies suggest that many different genes may be involved. Seizures typically persist for life and drug-resistant epilepsy is common.
Sunflower syndrome was classified as a subgroup of EEM termed “EEM with prominent photic induction” in the 2022 classifications by the International League Against Epilepsy. These patients display sun-seeking behavior with hand waving in front of the eyes, which may trigger seizures.

symptoms:
EEM consists of the following three characteristics: 1) eyelid myoclonia with or without absence seizures, 2) eye closure induced seizures or EEG paroxysms and 3) sensitivity to light (photosensitivity). Eyelid myoclonia is required for the diagnosis, which is defined as a jerking, flickering or fluttering of the eyelids usually associated with upward deviation of the orbit and can be associated with a tendency for the head to go backwards (retropulsion of the head). Eyelid myoclonia is typically prominent and the most difficult to control seizure type. Eyelid myoclonia can be induced by eye closure, especially in sunlight or other bright lights and may be associated with loss of awareness, known as absence seizures.
Other seizure types may be present including myoclonic seizures, where there are brief jerks of the extremities. Generalized tonic-clonic seizures are seen in most patients but are usually infrequent. With these seizures, patients lose control and have jerking movements of all their extremities.
Intellectual ability is typically normal, but eyelid myoclonia may interfere with schoolwork and attention problems may be present. Patients may also have anxiety and depression, as these are common conditions seen in patients with epilepsy. Patients with Sunflower syndrome often have developmental delays.

