Erythema Multiforme

synonyms:
Dermatostomatitis, Erythema Multiforme TypeErythema Multiforme BullosumErythema Polymorphe, Erythema Multiforme TypeFebrile Mucocutaneous SyndromeHerpes Iris, Erythema Multiforme Type

overview:
Erythema multiforme (EM) is the name applied to a group of hypersensitivity disorders, affecting mostly children and young adults, and characterized by symmetric red, patchy lesions, primarily on the arms and legs. The cause is unknown, but EM frequently occurs in association with herpes simplex virus, suggesting an immunologic process initiated by the virus. In half of the cases, the triggering agents appear to be medications, including anticonvulsants, sulfonamides, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and other antibiotics. In addition, some cases appear to be associated with infectious organisms such as Mycoplasma pneumoniae and many viral agents.
Erythema multiforme is the mildest of three skin disorders that are often discussed in relation to each other. It is generally the mildest of the three. More severe is Stevens-Johnson syndrome. The most severe of the three is toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN).

symptoms:
Onset of erythema multiforme is usually sudden in an otherwise healthy individual.  Red spots (macules or papules), or ridges (wheals), and sometimes blisters appear on the tops of the hands and forearms.  Other areas of involvement may include the face, neck, palms, soles of feet, legs, and trunk.  The lesions continue to erupt for two or three days.  Some spots, especially on the hands and forearms, may evolve into concentric circles that resemble a target, with a grayish discoloration in the center.  A crust may develop over the center.  In about half of the cases, lesions may develop on the lips and the mucous membranes in the mouth.  The skin lesions are usually distributed on both sides of the body.  Itching can also occur.
Systemic symptoms vary, but malaise, pain in the joints (arthralgia), muscular stiffness and fever are frequent.  Additional symptoms may include vision abnormalities; dry or bloodshot eyes; and eye pain, itching, or burning.
Attacks usually last two to four weeks, and may recur.  Classic EM tends to recur two or three times a year for several years after its first appearance.

