Erythromelalgia

synonyms:
erythermalgiaGerhardt diseaseMitchell diseaseWeir-Mitchell disease

overview:
Erythromelalgia is a rare condition that primarily affects the feet and, less commonly, the hands (extremities). It is characterized by intense, burning pain of affected extremities, severe redness (erythema) and increased skin temperature that may be episodic or almost continuous in nature. (The prefix “erythro-” denotes redness, “mel-” is a combining form meaning limb or limbs and the suffix “-algia” indicates pain.) Although erythromelalgia typically affects both sides of the body (bilateral), it may sometimes involve only one side (unilateral). The disease course may be extremely variable from person to person.
In most individuals, it is episodic/intermittent, with episodes of painful red-hot feet and/or hands intermittently. Symptom onset may be gradual (insidious), with the condition potentially remaining relatively mild for years. However, in others, it may have a sudden (acute) onset, and becoming severe over weeks or months.
The specific underlying cause of erythromelalgia remains unknown. Erythromelalgia is thought to result from vasomotor abnormalities or dysfunction in the normal narrowing (constriction) and widening (dilation) of the diameter (caliber) of certain blood vessels, leading to abnormalities of blood flow to the extremities. Erythromelalgia may be an isolated, primary condition or occur secondary to various underlying disorders. Primary erythromelalgia may appear to occur randomly for unknown reasons (sporadically) or may be familial, suggesting autosomal dominant inheritance.

symptoms:
Erythromelalgia is characterized by predominantly intermittent episodes of severe, burning pain associated with red hot extremities: during episodes there is marked redness (erythema) of the skin and increased skin temperature, particularly of the feet. In some affected individuals, the hands may be the primary sites of involvement. Although both sides of the body are usually affected (bilateral), involvement may sometimes be limited to one side (unilateral).
Erythromelalgia often starts with occasional episodes of red, of feet occurring for example once a week or once a month. The episodes may increase in frequency with time; the progression may sometimes occur gradually and subtly or remaining relatively mild and unchanged in nature or degree over years or decades. However, in others with the condition, symptoms may begin suddenly (acutely) and, in some people, may rapidly spread, increase in severity, and possibly become disabling over months. Reports suggest that in many affected individuals, the disorder has a chronic course that may gradually increase in severity over time. Rarely, involvement may spread (usually bilaterally), such as from the feet up the legs (lower limbs), from the hands up the arms (upper limbs), from the upper to the lower limbs, from the lower to the upper limbs and occasionally involve the ears or face.
Associated symptoms may occur intermittently or on an almost continuous basis. Episodes or intensification of symptoms are sometimes described as “flaring”, during which there is sudden (acute) redness, pain, sensation of heat and swelling. During a flare, some affected individuals may also experience tingling pain or other symptoms similar to those associated with peripheral neuropathy. (For further information on this condition, please see the “Related Disorders” section of this report below.) Many patients report that flares occur late in the day and may occur at night in bed, thus potentially interfering with sleep.
“Hallmarks” or characteristics of erythromelalgia include triggering or worsening of symptoms with exposure to heat (heat intolerance) or exercise and relief with cooling. These symptoms are characteristic of erythromelalgia but may occur with other disorders. They are not unique to erythromelalgia. The temperature at which symptoms may be triggered or exacerbated varies from person to person. (Please see the “Standard Therapies” section below for further information).

