Erythropoietic Protoporphyria and X-Linked Protoporphyria

synonyms:
EPPerythrohepatic protoporphyriaprotoporphyria

overview:
Summary
Erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP) is a rare inherited metabolic disorder caused by a deficiency of the enzyme ferrochelatase (FECH), which results from changes (mutations) in theFECHgene. Due to abnormally low levels of this enzyme, excessive amounts of protoporphyrin accumulate in the bone marrow, blood plasma, and red blood cells. Some patients with symptoms of EPP have a genetic change in a different gene calledALAS2. When a patient has a genetic change in this gene, the condition is referred to as X-linked protoporphyria (XLP).
The major symptoms of these disorders is severe pain on exposure to sunlight and some types of artificial light, such as fluorescent lights (phototoxicity). On sun exposure, patients may first experience tingling, itching, burning of the skin. After continued exposure to light, the skin may become red and swollen. The hands, arms, and face are the most commonly affected areas. Some people with EPP/XLP may also have complications related to liver and gallbladder function.
Introduction
Erythropoietic protoporphyria is one of a group of disorders known as the porphyrias. The porphyrias are all characterized by abnormally high levels of particular chemicals (porphyrins) in the body due to deficiencies of certain enzymes essential to the synthesis of hemoglobin. There are at least eight types of porphyria. The symptoms associated with the various types of porphyria differ, depending upon the specific enzyme that is deficient. It is important to note that people who have one type of porphyria do not develop any of the other types.

symptoms:
The most common symptom of erythropoietic protoporphyria and X-linked protoporphyria is severe pain on sun exposure. Some patients may also be sensitive to some types of artificial light. When the skin is exposed to sun, patients first develop tingling, itching, and/or burning of the skin. These symptoms serve as warning signs as longer exposure can result in severe pain. Affected individuals may also have an abnormal accumulation of body fluid under affected areas (edema) and/or persistent redness or inflammation of the skin (erythema). In rare cases, affected areas of the skin may develop sac-like lesions (blisters) and scar if exposure to sunlight is prolonged. However, scarring and/or discoloring of the skin is uncommon and rarely severe. These affected areas of skin may become abnormally thick. The severity and degree of symptoms is different from case to case. Some patients may only be able to tolerate a few minutes of sun exposure while others may be able to tolerate longer sun exposure without symptoms. The amount of sun tolerated may also be different based on weather conditions. Symptoms are often seen during infancy; however, in some cases, it may not occur until adolescence or rarely in adulthood.
In some affected individuals, the flow of bile through the gallbladder and bile ducts (biliary system) may be interrupted (cholestasis) causing gallstones (cholelithiasis) to form. In turn, such stones can cause obstruction and/or inflammation of the gallbladder (cholecystitis). Rarely, affected individuals may also develop liver damage that, in very severe cases, may lead to liver failure requiring transplantation. As liver transplantation does not cure EPP or XLP, a bone marrow transplant following liver transplant may be necessary in some cases.
Symptoms usually start in childhood but diagnosis is often delayed since blistering is not common and, because the porphyrins are insoluble, they cannot be detected on urinanalysis. The diagnosis is made upon finding increased levels of the protoporphyrin in the plasma or red blood cells in both EPP and XLP. Genetic testing is useful to confirm the diagnosis.
Patients with EPP and XLP may also have mild anemia (low blood counts). In many cases, this may be due to low iron stores. They may also have high levels of liver enzymes on blood tests.

