Erythrokeratoderma

overview:
Summary
Erythrokeratoderma is an umbrella term for a group of rare genetic skin disorders characterized by well-demarcated plaques of reddened, dry and thickened skin. Typically, these lesions are distributed symmetrically on the body and tend to slowly expand and progress over time. The severity and progression of the disorder can vary greatly from one person to another, even among members of the same family.  Progressive symmetric erythrokeratoderma (PSEK) and erythokeratodermia variabilis et progressiva (EKVP)   are the most common forms of erythrokeratoderma.

symptoms:
The symptoms of PSEK usually develop shortly after birth or during the first year of life. Infants develop reddened plaques of thickened, rough and/or scaly skin, especially on the face, buttocks, arms and legs. Over time, these lesions can cover large areas of the body. The distribution of these lesions is almost perfectly symmetrical, meaning the size, shape and location of the lesions are extremely similar on both sides of the body. These plaques are slowly progressive increasing in number and size throughout early childhood before either stabilizing, regressing or disappearing sometime later during life. Rarely, waxing and waning may occur. In some patients, the chest and abdomen may become involved. Abnormally thickened or calloused skin on the palms and soles (palmoplantar keratoderma; PPK) is not uncommon and can be disabling.
The majority of individuals with features of erythrokeratoderma belong to the clinical spectrum of erythrokeratodermia variabilis (EKV) or PSEK, hence a unifying name of ‘erythrokeratodermia variabilis et progressiva’ (EKVP) has been coined. The hallmark of classic EKV is the occurrence of figurate-outlined red patches, which seem to come and go quickly (so-called ‘fleeting erythema’), sometimes provoked by sudden temperature changes or other triggers. These red patches are more common in childhood and seem to disappear in adulthood. Features of both EKV and PSEK may be present within a single family, caused by a sequence change in a connexin gene. Extremely rarely, the sharply demarcated, thickened and red skin plaques may be distributed in a linear or whorl-like pattern due to mosaicism for a connexin gene mutation in a subset of epidermal skin cells.
Nevertheless, there are many other different forms and causes of erythrokeratoderma, reflecting the clinical and genetic heterogeneity of this condition, which is delineated in the section below.

