ESCO2 Spectrum Disorder

overview:
Summary

ESCO2spectrum disorder includes conditions caused by changes (variants or mutations) in theESCO2gene that range from Roberts syndrome at the severe end to SC phocomelia at the milder end. Roberts syndrome is the best known and most widely studied condition in this group. These conditions are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
Roberts syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by growth delays before and after birth, malformations of the arms and legs, and distinctive abnormalities of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region. Intellectual disability occurs in about half of affected children. In infants with Roberts syndrome, the arms and legs may be incompletely developed (limb reduction abnormalities), however, such limb defects are usually symmetrical which are distinct from the asymmetrical limb defects in Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS). Such abnormalities may range from absence of all four limbs (tetraphocomelia) to less severe degrees of limb reduction, such as underdevelopment and/or absence of certain bones of the upper arms (humeri), forearms (radii and/or ulnae), thighs (femurs), shins (tibiae), and/or on the outside of the lower legs (fibulae). Characteristic craniofacial abnormalities may include an unusually small, broad head (microbrachycephaly); abnormal grooves on either side of the upper lip (bilateral cleft lip); incomplete development of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate); thin, small wings of the nose (hypoplastic nasal alae) and/or low-set, malformed (dysplastic) ears. Additional abnormalities are often present.

Introduction
Initially, researchers believed that Roberts syndrome and SC phocomelia syndrome were separate disorders. However, researchers now believe that the two disorders are different expressions of one distinct disorder because different changes in the same gene are the underlying cause for both conditions. Juberg-Hayward syndrome is a malformation syndrome characterized by cleft lip/palate, microcephaly, drooping upper eye lids (ptosis), short stature, hypoplasia or aplasia of thumbs, and dislocation of radial head and fusion of humerus and radius leading to elbow restriction.

symptoms:
The symptoms associated with Roberts syndrome vary widely from person to person even among members of the same family. Most infants experience growth deficiencies and have abnormalities of the limbs and craniofacial region. Infants with Roberts syndrome often experience life-threatening complications early in infancy.
Affected infants may experience growth deficiencies before and after birth. Intellectual disability is a variable finding that occurs in approximately 50 percent of affected children.
Limb abnormalities are common in infants with Roberts syndrome and may range from underdeveloped bones in the arms and legs (hypomelia) to complete absence of all four limbs (tetraphocomelia). The arms are usually more severely affected than the legs.
Additional abnormalities may affect the arms and legs including permanent fixation (contracture) of various joints, especially the knees and elbows. The number of fingers and/or toes may be reduced, and the fifth fingers may be in a fixed laterally deviated position (clinodactyly). Webbing of the finger and toes (syndactyly) may also be present. Infants with Roberts syndrome may also have a form of club foot where the heel of the foot may be elevated and turned outward away from the body (talipes equinovalgus).
Infants with Roberts syndrome also have a variety of craniofacial abnormalities including a small, broad head (microbrachycephaly); an abnormal groove in the upper lip (cleft lip) with or without incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate); a flattened nose with small wings; an abnormally small jaw (micrognathia); sparse, silvery hair; and malformed, low-set ears that often lack lobes. Some infants may experience premature fusion of the fibrous joints (cranial sutures) between certain bones in the skull (craniosynostosis). Affected infants may have eye (ocular) abnormalities including widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism); unusually small eyes (microphthalmia); cloudy corneas; and bulging or prominent eyes (proptosis) due to shallow eye cavities (orbits). In some children, the whites of the eyes may be blue (blue sclera) and increased pressure within the eyeball (glaucoma) may also be present.
Some infants with Roberts syndrome may have one or more pink or dark red irregularly shaped patches of skin (hemangiomas) on the face caused by dense collections of small blood vessels (capillaries).
Infants with Roberts syndrome often have abnormalities affecting the genitourinary system. Males may have the urinary opening located on the underside of the penis (hypospadias) and the testicles may fail to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism). Females may have a malformed uterus with horn-like branches (bicornuate uterus).
Less common symptoms associated with Roberts syndrome include malformed kidneys, an abnormal increase in cerebrospinal fluid resulting in enlargement of the skull (hydrocephalus), paralysis of cranial nerves, seizures, heart defects and a decreased number of blood platelets (thrombocytopenia).

