Esophageal Atresia andor Tracheoesophageal Fistula

synonyms:
atresia of esophagus with or without tracheoesophageal fistulaesophageal atresiatracheoesophageal fistulatracheoesophageal fistula with or without esophageal atresia

overview:
Esophageal atresia (EA) is a rare birth defect in which the esophagus (the tube that connects the throat with the stomach) does not develop normally. In infants with EA, the esophagus is usually separated into two parts, an upper and lower segment. These two segments do not connect. One or both segments (usually the upper) end in a blind pouch. Consequently, the normal passage between the mouth and stomach does not exist. EA often occurs in association with a tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), which is an abnormal passage or connection (fistula) between the esophagus (usually the lower) and the trachea (windpipe). The trachea is the tube that runs from the voice box in the throat to the lungs (bronchi), and carries air to and from the lungs. EA/TEF is a life-threatening condition, however, the majority of affected infants will recover fully if the defect is detected early and treated appropriately. The exact underlying causes of EA/TEF are not fully understood. EA/TEF can occur as isolated findings (nonsyndromic), associated with other birth defects (non-isolated), or as part of a larger syndrome.

symptoms:
Infants with EA/TEF are unable to swallow normally and can have trouble breathing (respiratory distress). After birth, infants will exhibit excessive amounts of drool, mucus and other oral secretions because they are unable to swallow. These secretions may appear as frothy white bubbles in an infant’s mouth and recur even after being suctioned out.
If a TEF is present, affected infants are also at risk of secretions, such as gastric juices and saliva/mucus, being inhaled into the lungs (aspiration). Consequently, these infants can develop significant respiratory distress and/or pneumonia.
Affected infants may experience episodes of coughing, gagging or choking. They can also experience repeated episodes of low levels of oxygen in the blood (hypoxia/cyanosis). Cyanosis is characterized by shortness of breath, coughing, flaring of the nostrils when breathing and bluish discoloration of the skin. Some of these infants have abnormal softening and weakening of the cartilage of the trachea (tracheomalacia) so that the walls of the trachea are floppy instead of rigid. This is often mild, but can be severe, leading to collapse of the air passage. Tracheomalacia can contribute to breathing difficulties and may precipitate respiratory arrest (near death episodes).
Approximately 50 percent of infants with an EA/TEF have another birth defect. Heart (cardiac) abnormalities are the most frequent additional birth defect associated with EA/TEF. Such abnormalities can include ventricular septal defects or more complex abnormalities such as Tetralogy of Fallot. Abnormalities of the gastrointestinal system and urogenital tract are the next most common birth defects that occur along with EA/TEF. These include imperforate anus, a condition in which the anal opening fails to develop properly. Less common are abnormalities of the neurological and musculoskeletal systems. Many abnormalities occur in combination – the VACTERL association (Vertebral, Anorectal, Cardiac, TracheoEsophageal, Renal and Limb defects)
A classification system has been devised that breaks EA/TEF into different subtypes. Although this classification system is commonly used, it is not universal. Type C is the most common form. The other types affect less than 15 percent of individuals with EA/TEF. Under the classification, the subtypes include,
TYPE AOnly EA is present (there is no TEF). The esophagus is separated in two with both the upper and lower portions ending in blind pouches. This is sometimes referred to as pure esophageal atresia and accounts for approximately 8 percent of cases.
TYPE BThe lower segment of the esophagus ends in a blind pouch and the upper segment is connected to the trachea via a TEF. This form is rare, accounting for approximately 2 percent of cases.
TYPE CThe upper segment of the esophagus ends in a blind pouch and the lower segment is connected to the trachea via a TEF. This is the most common type of EA/TEF occurring in approximately 85 percent of individuals.
TYPE DA TEF is present connecting both the upper and lower segments of the esophagus to the trachea. This is the rarest form of EA/TEF affecting less than 1 percent of cases.
TYPE EIn this form, the esophagus is intact and connects normally to the stomach. However, a TEF is present connecting the esophagus and the trachea. This is also known as H-type fistula. (4 percent).

