Evans Syndrome

overview:
Summary
Evans syndrome is a rare disorder in which the body’s immune system produces antibodies that mistakenly destroy red blood cells, platelets and sometimes certain white blood cell known as neutrophils. This leads to abnormally low levels of these blood cells in the body (cytopenia). The premature destruction of red blood cells (hemolysis) is known as autoimmune hemolytic anemia or AIHA. Thrombocytopenia refers to low levels of platelets (idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura or ITP in this instance). Neutropenia refers to low levels of certain white blood cells known as neutrophils. Evans syndrome is defined as the association of AIHA along with ITP; neutropenia occurs less often. In some cases, autoimmune destruction of these blood cells occurs at the same time (simultaneously); in most cases, one condition develops first before another condition develops later on (sequentially). The symptoms and severity of Evans syndrome can vary greatly from one person to another. Evans syndrome can potentially cause severe, life-threatening complications. Evans syndrome may occur by itself as a primary (idiopathic) disorder or in association with other autoimmune disorders or lymphoproliferative disorders as a secondary disorder. (Lymphoproliferative disorders are characterized by the overproduction of white blood cells.) The distinction between primary and secondary Evans syndrome is important as it can influence treatment.
Introduction
Evans syndrome was first described in the medical literature in 1951 by Dr. Robert Evans and associates. For years, the disorder was considered a coincidental occurrence of AIHA with thrombocytopenia and/or neutropenia. However, researchers now believe that the disorder represents a distinct condition characterized by a chronic, profound (more than in ITP or AIHA alone) state of immune system malfunction (dysregulation).

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of Evans syndrome can vary greatly from one person to another as can the onset, course and duration of the disorder. Most individuals exhibit a chronic course with periods of worsening symptoms (exacerbation) and remissions usually induced transiently by treatment. Most symptoms are caused by low levels of specific blood cells in the body. These blood cells perform specific functions. Red blood cells deliver oxygen to the body and remove carbon dioxide, platelets assist in clotting to stop blood loss, and white blood cells help to fight infection.
Some individuals with Evans syndrome may first present with accelerated destruction of red blood cells faster than the body can replace them. Low levels of circulating red blood cells, known as anemia, can cause a variety of symptoms including fatigue, pale skin color (pallor), lightheadedness, shortness of breath, dark colored urine, and a rapid heartbeat. Some individuals may develop yellowing of the skin and especially the whites of the eyes (jaundice).
Other individuals may first present with low levels of platelets, known as thrombocytopenia. Thrombocytopenia may cause tiny reddish or purple spots on the skin (petechiae), larger purplish discoloration on the skin caused by bleeding from ruptured blood vessels into subcutaneous tissue (ecchymosis), and purpura, a rash consisting of purple spots cause by internal bleeding from small blood vessels. Affected individuals may be more susceptible to bruising following minimal injury and spontaneous bleeding from the mucous membranes.
Low levels of white blood cells, known as neutropenia, occurs less frequently in individuals with Evans syndrome than anemia or thrombocytopenia. Individuals with neutropenia may be susceptible to recurrent infections. General symptoms may include fever, a general feeling of poor health (malaise) and sores (ulcers) on the mucous membranes of the mouth.
Additional symptoms that may occur in individuals with Evans syndrome include enlargement of the lymph nodes, spleen and liver. These findings may come and go or, in some cases, may only occur during acute episodes.
All too often, patients with Evans syndrome may not respond to treatment (refractory Evans syndrome) and can eventually progress to cause life-threatening complications including sepsis, severe bleeding (hemorrhaging) episodes, and significant cardiovascular problems including heart failure.

