Ewing Sarcoma

synonyms:
EFTEwing family of tumorsEwing's SarcomaEwing tumorTEFtumor of the Ewing family (TEF)

overview:
Ewing sarcoma is a rare bone tumor that occurs most often in adolescents. It can also arise outside of the bone in soft tissue (extraosseous Ewing sarcoma). Ewing sarcoma is related to another type of tumor known as primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET). Researchers have learned that these tumors are associated with the same chromosomal abnormality (balanced reciprocal translocation) and share many physiological characteristics. Consequently, these tumors are sometimes collectively classified as the Ewing family of tumors (EFT). This general term encompasses Ewing sarcoma of bone, extraosseous Ewing sarcoma, primitive neuroectodermal tumor, and Askin’s tumor (a tumor of the chest wall). Ewing sarcoma of bone accounts for approximately 70 percent of the tumors in this family. Generally, the term Ewing sarcoma is preferred because, despite the different names, it is one tumor, molecularly. Ewing sarcoma of bone most often affects the long bone of the legs (femur) and flat bones such as those found in the pelvis and chest well. Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive cancer that may spread (metastasize) to the lungs, other bones, and bone marrow potentially causing life-threatening complications. The exact cause of these tumors is unknown.
Ewing sarcoma was first described in the medical literature in 1921 by Dr. James Ewing. Ewing sarcoma is the second most common primary bone tumor in children and accounts for approximately 2% of all childhood cancer diagnoses.
NORD’s report on Ewing sarcoma is a detailed summary of the main aspects of this rare disorder. The National Cancer Institute offers comprehensive, in-depth information on this disorder, which is available at,
For patients: https://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/ewings/Patient
For healthcare professionals: https://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/ewings/HealthProfessional

symptoms:
Individuals with a tumor in the Ewing family of tumors may exhibit pain, tenderness, and swelling near the affected part of the body. Pain often comes and goes (intermittent) initially, eventually progressing to be more consistent. Weakness and numbness in the affected area can also occur. In some cases, affected individuals may also experience fever, lack of energy, weight loss, low levels of circulating red blood cells (anemia), and increased levels of circulating white blood cells (leukocytosis). A palpable mass is often present.
Ewing sarcoma most often affects the middle portion (diaphyseal region) of the long bones of the arms and legs, especially the long bone of the leg (femur). These tumors also commonly affect flat bones such as those found in the pelvis, chest wall, and spinal column (vertebrae). Ewing sarcoma may occur in any bone of the body such as the bones of the foot, the hand, the lower jaw (mandible), the skull, and/or additional locations. Soft tissue tumors develop most often in the trunk and chest. However, the most common site of presentation is the pelvis accounting for about 25% of cases. Ewing sarcoma may weaken bones sometimes resulting in fractures.
These tumors are often aggressive and may spread (metastasize) to additional areas of the body, especially to other bones and the lungs. In rare cases, the bone marrow may become involved.
Symptoms associated with these tumors are secondary to their location. For example, a tumor of the leg may result in a limp, a tumor in the lungs may result in breathing problems and an accumulation of fluid in the tissue layers that line the lungs and chest cavity (pleural effusion), or a tumor in the spinal column may cause weakness or paralysis of affected muscles (paraplegia).

