Fabry Disease

synonyms:
alpha-galactosidase A deficiencyAnderson-Fabry diseaseangiokeratoma corporis diffusumangiokeratoma diffuseGLA deficiency

overview:
Fabry disease is a rare inherited disorder of glycosphingolipid (fat) metabolism resulting from the absent or markedly deficient activity of the lysosomal enzyme, α-galactosidase A (α-Gal A). This disorder belongs to a group of diseases known as lysosomal storage disorders. This enzymatic deficiency is caused by alterations (mutations) in the α-galactosidase A (GLA) gene that instructs cells to make the α-galactosidase A (α-Gal A) enzyme. Lysosomes function as the primary digestive tract of cells. Enzymes within lysosomes break down or digest particular compounds and intracellular structures. α-Gal A functions to break down complex sugar-lipid molecules called glycolipids, specifically, globotriaosylceramide (GL-3 or Gb3), its deacylated form Lyso-GL-3/Gb3 and related glycolipids, by removing the terminal galactose sugar from the end of these glycolipid molecules. The enzyme deficiency causes a continuous build-up of GL-3/Gb3 and related glycolipids in the body’s cells, resulting in the cell abnormalities and organ dysfunction that particularly affect small blood vessels, the heart and kidneys (Desnick 2001, Germain 2010).
TheGLAgene is located on the X-chromosome and therefore, Fabry disease is inherited as an X-linked disorder. Males with the type 1 classic and type 2 later-onset phenotypes (see below) are typically significantly more severely affected than their affected female relatives (Arends 2017). Females typically have a more variable course and may be asymptomatic or as severely affected as their male relatives (see Genetics section below).
There are two major disease phenotypes: type 1 “classic” and type 2 “later-onset” subtypes. Both lead to renal failure, and/or cardiac disease, and early death (Desnick 2001, Desnick and Banikazemi 2006, Arends 2017, Doheny 2018). Type 1 males have little or no functional α-Gal A enzymatic activity (<3% of normal mean activity), and marked accumulation of GL-3/Gb3 and related glycolipids in capillaries and small blood vessels which cause the major symptoms in childhood or adolescence. These include acroparesthesias (excruciating pain in the hands and feet which occur with exercise, fevers, stress, etc.); angiokeratomas (clusters of red to blue rash-like discolorations on the skin); anhidrosis or hypohidrosis (absent or markedly decreased sweating); gastrointestinal symptoms including abdominal pain and cramping, and frequent bowel movements; and a characteristic corneal dystrophy (star-burst pattern of the cornea seen by an slit-lamp ophthalmologic examination) that does not affect vision (Sher 1979, Desnick 2001).  With increasing age, the systemic GL-3/Gb3 deposition, especially in the heart leads to arrhythmias, left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) and then hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), and in the kidneys to progressive proteinuria, renal insufficiency, and renal failure, and/or to cerebrovascular disease including transient ischemic attacks (TIAs) and strokes. Prior to renal replacement therapy (i.e., dialysis and transplantation) and enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), the average age of death of affected males with the type 1 classic phenotype was ~40 years (Columbi 1967). The incidence of males with the type 1 classic phenotype is about 1 in 40,000 (Desnick 2001), but varies with geographic region and race, ranging from about ~1 in 18,000 to 1 in 95,000 based on newborn screening studies (e.g., Spada 2006, Hwu 2009, Burlina 2018, and Wasserstein 2019).
In contrast, males with the type 2 “later-onset” phenotype (previously called cardiac or renal variants) have residual α-Gal A activity, lack GL-3/Gb3 accumulation in capillaries and small blood vessels, and do not show the early manifestations of type 1 males (i.e., the acroparesthesias, hypohidrosis, angiokeratomas, corneal dystrophy, etc). They experience an essentially normal childhood and adolescence, and typically present with renal and/or cardiac disease in the third to seventh decades of life. Most type 2 later-onset patients have been identified by enzyme screening of patients in cardiac, hemodialysis, renal transplant, and stroke clinics (Doheny 2018), and recently by newborn screening (e.g. Spada 2006, Hwu 2009, Burlina 2018, Wasserstein 2019). Based on these screening studies the incidence of type 2 later-onset disease in males varies by demography, ethnicity, and race, but is at least 5-10 times more frequent than that of the type 1 males from the same region, ethnic group, or race.
Clinical manifestations in heterozygous females from families with the type 1 classic phenotype are variable due to random X-chromosomal inactivation (Dobrovolny 2005, Echevarria 2015) and range from asymptomatic to as severe as type 1 classic males (Desnick and Banikazemi 2006, Arends 2017). Type 2 heterozygotes may be asymptomatic or develop renal or cardiac manifestations later in life. Approximately 90% of type 1 heterozygotes have the characteristic corneal dystrophy, while the type 2 heterozygous females typically lack the characteristic corneal findings or other early type 1 manifestation (Desnick 2001, Desnick and Banikazemi 2006, Doheny 2018). The frequency and severity of manifestations in type 2 heterozygous females has only been systematically investigated recently, and they are typically less frequent and less severe than those seen in their type 2 male relatives (Arends 2017).

symptoms:
Type 1 Classic Phenotype
The signs and symptoms of males with the type 1 classic phenotype typically begin in childhood or adolescence (Desnick 2001, Desnick and Brady 2004). Symptoms increase with age primarily due to the progressive glycolipid accumulation in the micro-vascular system, kidney podocytes, and cardiomyocytes leading to kidney insufficiency and failure, heart disease, and/or strokes. Early and progressive clinical symptoms include:
Acroparesthesias.Pain is an early symptom of the type 1 Classic subtype and may occur as early as 2-8 years of age in males, and can occur during childhood or adolescence in female heterozygotes, particularly associated with fevers. Affected individuals may experience episodes of severe burning pain in the hands and the feet (acroparesthesia). Severe episodes of pain (Fabry’s crises) may last for hours to days and are frequently triggered by exercise, fatigue, stress, and/or fever (Burlina 2011).Anhidrosis or hypohidrosis.Type 1 males and some type 1 females have decreased or absent sweat production (hypohidrosis or anhidrosis) and discomfort (heat intolerance) in warm temperatures, with exercise, or fevers.Angiokeratomas.Early symptoms also include the appearance of a reddish to dark-blue skin rash, especially in the area between the hips and the knees. These skin lesions may be flat or raised. They often are found in the umbilical area or genitals of type 1 males. Typically, males and females with the type 2 later-onset phenotype do not have these characteristic skin lesions.
Gastrointestinal problems.GI symptoms are an early manifestation of type 1 Fabry Abdominal cramping, frequent bowel movements, and diarrhea may also occur, particularly after a large meal.
Corneal dystrophy.Patients with the type 1 classic phenotype have abnormal deposits of glycolipids in their corneas resulting in a characteristic whorl-like opacity, which can be seen by slit-lamp examination by an experienced ophthalmologist. These changes do not affect vision. Blood vessels in the eyes may appear twisted (cork screw-like; contorted) and/or slightly enlarged (dilated) due to the glycolipid accumulation in the vessel walls.Additional Type 1 symptoms.Other symptoms that may be associated with Fabry disease include chronic fatigue, dizziness, headache, generalized weakness, nausea, and/or vomiting, delayed puberty, lack of or sparse hair growth, and rarely malformation of the joints of the fingers. Some type 1 classic males have abnormal accumulation of lymph in the feet and legs associated with swelling (lymphedema). In these patients, lymph, a body fluid containing certain white blood cells, fats, and proteins, accumulates outside blood vessels in spaces between cells and drains or flows back into the bloodstream via lymph vessels. Lymphedema results from disruption of lymph’s normal drainage due to the glycolipid accumulation in the lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes.
Common Manifestations in Type 1 and 2 Males
With advancing age in type 1 males, typically in the third to fourth decades, and in type 2 males in the third to sixth decades, the progressive GL-3/Gb3 glycolipid deposition leads to renal and/or heart manifestations as described below (Desnick 2001, Arends 2017). Many of the type 2 later-onset males who lack the early manifestations seen in the type 1 males, are detected in renal, heart, or stroke clinics (Nakao 1995, 2003; Doheny 2018). Patients with the type 2 later-onset subtype typically do not have the skin lesions (angiokeratoma), sweat normally, do not experience the Fabry pain or crises, and do not have heat intolerance or corneal involvement. These individuals develop heart or kidney disease later in adult life.
Signs of progressive organ involvement include:
Renal dysfunction. Progressive decrease in renal function is due to the progressive accumulation of GL-3/Gb3 in the kidneys, particularly in the endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells and podocytes (Najafian 2013; Tondel 2008, 2013). There is histological evidence of this accumulation and ensuing cellular and vascular injury to renal tissue beginning in childhood and adolescence (Tondel 2008, 2013; Najafian 2013) in type 1 classic males and females. In type 1 classic males, the decline in typically begins with podocyte involvement and microalbuminuria leading to frank proteinuria, increasing loss of function (decreasing glomerular filtration rate or GFR), all leading to kidney failure and the need for dialysis or transplantation typically by 35 to 45 years of age. In type 2 males, kidney involvement typically occurs in the fourth decade or later, but some patients do not develop renal failure (Meehan 2004). Kidney involvement in type 1 female heterozygotes is more variable. Only about 10-15% of type 1 females develop kidney failure. It is not clear what percentage of type 2 females develop renal failure, if any (Arends 2017).
Cardiac disease. GL-3/Gb3 deposition can be found in all cardiac tissues, including valves, cardiomyocytes, nerves, and coronary arteries (Desnick 1976). Heart disease includes heart enlargement, typically left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) leading to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), rhythm abnormalities (arrhythmias), and heart failure (Frustaci 2017). LVH occurs in about 20% of males and females with an average age of diagnosis in the early 20s to 40s among type 1 males and late 30s to 40s among type 1 female heterozygotes. Early heart involvement in type 1 males typically includes arrhythmias and mitral insufficiency in their 20s followed by LVH leading to HCM. Type 2 later-onset males develop similar heart manifestations as type 1 males, but at older ages and may be first diagnosed in cardiac clinics among patients with LVH or HCM (Doheny 2018). Heterozygous females with the type 1 phenotype often have sinus bradycardia as an early finding and may more severely affected heterozygotes can develop LVH progressing to HCM.
Cerebrovascular complications.As a result of the progressive GL-3/Gb3 deposition in the heart leading to atrial fibrillation and in the small blood vessels in the brain, about 7% of males and 4% of females with Fabry disease, particularly those with the type 1 phenotype, experience ischemic or hemorrhagic strokes, occurring typically in the fourth decade of life or later (Fellgiebel 2006, Wilcox 2008).
Respiratory abnormalities: Accumulation of glycosphingolipids and consequent fibrosis can cause interstitial lung disease. Pathological changes and tissue remodeling may involve both alveoli and the bronchial tree leading to restrictive lung disease, obstructive airway disease, or a mixture of obstructive and restrictive disease. (Svensson 2015). Respiratory symptoms may occur independent of cardiovascular disease in these patients.
Other pathology: Hearing loss, tinnitus, dizziness and vertigo potentially due to GL-3/Gb3 deposition in vestibular structures and/or auditory neuropathy are commonly reported in adult patients and while these are not life threatening, contribute to disease burden and negatively affect quality of life. Depression has been reported and a portion of these cases, especially Type I Classic males, were classified as having severe depression. (Cole 2007)

