Factor VII Deficiency

synonyms:
Alexander's diseasecongenital factor VII deficiencyinherited factor VII deficiency

overview:
Summary
Factor VII deficiency is a rare genetic bleeding disorder characterized by a deficiency or reduced activity of clotting factor VII. Clotting factors are specialized proteins that are essential for the blood to clot normally. Individuals with factor VII deficiency can experience prolonged, uncontrolled bleeding episodes. The severity of factor VII deficiency can vary greatly from one person to another. Some individuals may have no symptoms (asymptomatic); others may develop mild, moderate or potentially severe, life-threatening complications as early as in infancy. Factor VII deficiency is caused by mutations of theF7gene and is inherited as an autosomal recessive disorder.
Introduction
Factor VII deficiency was first described in the medical literature by Dr. Alexander, et al. in 1951 and was referred to as prothrombin conversion accelerator deficiency. The disorder has also been known as Alexander’s disease. In extremely rare instances, factor VII deficiency can be acquired during life; this report deals with the genetic form, which is present at birth (although symptoms may develop later).

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of factor VII deficiency are highly variable; no consistent correlation between the amount of factor VII in the blood and overall severity is seen. Some individuals may not develop any symptoms (asymptomatic), including individuals with relatively low levels of factor VII. Other individuals may have mild cases that are only apparent after trauma or surgery. Mild symptoms can include chronic nosebleeds, easy bruising, and bleeding from the gums. People who menstruate may develop heavy and prolonged periods (menorrhagia).
More serious bleeding complications occur in some individuals and may mimic bleeding patterns seen in hemophilia. Bleeding into the joints (hemarthrosis) can result in progressive joint damage and degeneration, eventually limiting the range of motion of an affected joint. Soft tissue bleeding can result in bruising that seems spontaneous or out of proportion to an injury. Affected individuals can develop masses of congealed blood called hematomas that can cause symptoms due to compression of nearby structures or organs. Bleeding in the stomach, intestines and urogenital tract can also occur resulting in blood in the urine (hematuria) or black, tarry, bloody stools (melena or hematochezia).
Bleeding in severe factor VII deficiency can result in life-threatening complications. These include major gastrointestinal bleeds as well as head bleeds (intracranial hemorrhage), often during the first few weeks or months of life. Although quite rare, head bleeds have been reported in adults as well.
Individuals with factor VII deficiency may experience bleeding after surgery or minor procedures or following trauma or injury. They may also bleed excessively following childbirth (postpartum bleeding). Some newborns have experienced abnormal bleeding from the umbilical cord stump at birth.
A seemingly paradoxical increased incidence of clotting (thrombosis) has been noted in factor VII deficiency in recent years. These thromboses can be arterial or venous and they can occur spontaneously or in conjunction with treatment.

