Factor XI Deficiency

synonyms:
haemophilia Chemophilia Cplasma thromboplastin antecedent deficiencyPTA deficiencyRosenthal syndrome

overview:
Summary

Factor XI deficiency is a rare genetic bleeding disorder caused by reduced levels and insufficient activity of a blood protein called factor XI. Factor XI is a clotting factor. Clotting factors are specialized proteins that are essential for proper clotting, the process by which blood solidifies like glue to plug the site of a wound to stop bleeding. Individuals with factor XI deficiency do not bleed faster or more profusely than healthy individuals, but, because their blood clots poorly, they may have difficulty stopping the flow of blood from a deep or surgical wound. This may be referred to as prolonged bleeding or a prolonged bleeding episode. The severity of symptoms in factor XI deficiency can vary from one person to another and is not clearly related to the blood factor XI level. In most patients, prolonged bleeding episodes only occur after surgery, dental procedures or trauma. Bleeding tendencies in factor XI deficiency are unpredictable and inconsistent, making the disorder difficult to manage in some cases. Factor XI deficiency is caused by disruptions or changes (mutations) to theF11gene and can occur in males and females.

Introduction

Factor XI deficiency was first described in the medical literature in 1953. It used to be also referred to as hemophilia C in order to distinguish it from the better known hemophilia types A and B. In rare cases, factor XI deficiency can be acquired during life (acquired factor XI deficiency). This report deals with the genetic form. Although the genetic form is present at birth, as it is a mild bleeding disorder symptoms do not usually occur until later in life.

symptoms:
In most cases, the bleeding tendency in individuals with factor XI deficiency, even with very low factor levels, is mild. Affected individuals may experience bleeding episodes following trauma or surgery including dental procedures, tonsillectomies or surgery involving the urinary or genital tracts. Bleeding may also occur after circumcision. Bleeding may begin at the time of injury and persist if untreated, or bleeding may develop several hours after the injury. Untreated individuals may develop large, solid swellings of congealed blood (hematomas) following a surgical procedure.
Affected individuals may be prone to bruising or nosebleeds. Women may experience prolonged, heavy bleeding during their menstrual periods (menorrhagia). Some affected women experience prolonged bleeding after childbirth.
Bleeding into the joints or spontaneous bleeding (both common with hemophilia types A and B) does not occur in individuals with factor XI deficiency (unless there is underlying joint disease). Blood in the urine (hematuria) is rare. Bleeding in the gut (gastrointestinal hemorrhaging) has been reported usually in relation to an underlying disease rather than the factor deficiency itself.

