Factor XIII Deficiency

synonyms:
congenital factor XIII deficiencyfibrin stabilizing factor deficiencyinherited factor XIII deficiency

overview:
Summary
Factor XIII deficiency is a rare, genetic bleeding disorder characterized by deficiency of clotting factor XIII. Clotting factors are specialized proteins that are essential for the blood to clot properly. Specifically, individuals with factor XIII deficiency form blood clots like normal, but these clots are unstable and often break down, resulting in prolonged, uncontrolled bleeding episodes. Factor XIII also affects other processes in the body and is known to play a role in proper wound healing and pregnancy. The severity of factor XIII deficiency bleeds can vary greatly from one person to another. Some individuals may have only mild symptoms; other individuals may have severe, life-threatening bleeds. With early diagnosis and prompt treatment, the more serious bleeds of factor XIII deficiency can be avoided. FXIII consists of two subunits: subunit A and subunit B. Most of the Factor XIII deficiency states are caused by mutations in subunit A; very few have a mutation in subunit B. Factor XIII deficiency is inherited as an autosomal recessive disorder.
Introduction
This report deals with the genetic form of factor XIII deficiency, which is present at birth (congenital); the disorder can also be acquired during life. Although the genetic form is present at birth, symptoms may not become apparent until later during life. Congenital factor XIII deficiency was first described in the medical literature by Duckert, et al., in 1960.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of factor XIII deficiency can vary from one person to another. However, in most of the patients (80%) bleeding symptoms appear after birth with bleeding from the umbilical stump being most common. Some individuals may only have a mild expression of the disorder that will not become apparent until after a bleeding complication occurs following trauma or surgery. In more serious cases, bleeding can occur spontaneously or following activities that normally would not produce problems such as strenuous exercise. It is important to note the variability of factor XIII deficiency and to understand that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
The symptoms of factor XIII deficiency may become apparent at any age, but most patients are diagnosed during infancy. Symptoms commonly associated with factor XIII deficiency include chronic nosebleeds (epistaxis), bleeding from the gums, discoloration of the skin due to bleeding underneath the skin (ecchymoses), and solid swellings of congealed blood (hematomas). Affected individuals may bruise easily, extensively, and without cause (spontaneously). Bruising due to minor trauma may be delayed. Women with factor XIII deficiency may experience prolonged, heavy bleeding during the periods (menorrhagia). Bleeding into the soft tissues and around the joints (periarticular bleeding) can also occur. Bleeding into the joints (hemoarthrosis) is rare.
Thirty percent of the affected individuals may also experience spontaneous bleeding into the brain (intracranial hemorrhages), about 25% experience poor or delayed wound healing and others may have enhanced bleeding after trauma or surgery. The risk of intracranial hemorrhaging is greater in factor XIII deficiency than in other related bleeding disorders. Bleeding after trauma or surgery is initially normal, but abnormal, heavy bleeding often develops within 12-36 hours. In homozygous women, factor XIII deficiency has also been associated with recurrent miscarriages (spontaneous abortion).

