Factor X Deficiency

synonyms:
congenital factor X deficiencycongenital Stuart factor deficiencyF10 deficiencyStuart-Power factor deficiency

overview:
Factor X deficiency is a rare genetic blood disorder that causes the normal clotting process (coagulation) to take longer than normal. This causes people to bleed for a longer amount of time spontaneously or after trauma/surgery. Factor X is a clotting protein (also called a clotting factor). Clotting factors are specialized proteins that are essential for proper clotting, the process by which blood clumps together to plug the site of a wound to stop bleeding. Clotting requires a series of reactions to ultimately form a clot to plug a wound. This is referred to as the clotting (coagulation) cascade. The clotting cascade involves different substances in addition to clotting factors. Factor X, which is produced (synthesized) in the liver, eventually interacts with other clotting factors and certain cells or substances, e.g., platelets or fibrinogen, to help to form a clot. Factor X deficiency is caused by a change (variant or mutation) in theF10gene. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) approved a drug called Coagadex for adults and children over 12. This medication restores functional factor X levels.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of factor X deficiency are highly variable; this means that how the disorder affects one person can be very different from how it affects another person. Symptoms can develop at any age. Generally, the more severe the disorder, the earlier the symptoms begin.
Sometimes, factor X deficiency is broken down based on the residual amount of factor X activity. In many disorders, the amount of residual protein activity correlates with the severity of the disease (e.g., little to no residual protein activity results in severe disease). This is not true for all bleeding disorders but is true for factor X deficiency – generally the less protein activity the more severe the bleeding complications.Individuals with about 40% or more protein activity have mild disorder and often do not have symptoms (asymptomatic). Individuals with 10%-40% activity have moderate disease and general symptoms associated with bleeding disorders. Individuals with 10% or less factor X activity have severe disease, particularly those with less than 1% of factor X. In some instances, the amount of secreted factor X is normal or near normal, but cannot function normally; in other cases, FX is not secreted at all.
Symptoms of moderate forms can include bruising easily, nosebleeds and bleeding from the mouth and the gums. There may be blood in the urine (hematuria). Some individuals may not have any symptoms except for when they experience trauma or surgery. Without treatment, these symptoms can occur throughout life.
With the most severe forms, symptoms can begin at or shortly after birth and, in addition to the symptoms common to moderate forms, patients with the severe deficiency may present bleeding into the joints. This is called hemarthrosis and can result in progressive joint damage and degeneration, eventually limiting the range of motion of an affected joint. Bleeding into the muscles (intramuscular bleeds) can also occur, which can cause pain and stiffness in the affected muscles. Some affected individuals will develop masses of congealed blood called hematomas that can cause symptoms due to compression of nearby structures or organs. Bleeding in the stomach and intestines (gastrointestinal tract) is frequent in severe factor X deficiency. The urogenital tract can also be affected resulting in blood in the urine (hematuria) or black, tarry bloody stools (melena).
There is a high risk of intracranial hemorrhaging, a life-threatening complication in which there is bleeding inside the skull. This risk can be present from birth. Sometimes, umbilical stump bleeding can result at birth. The umbilical stump is the small piece of the umbilical cord that remains in the bellybutton after birth. The stump usually dries up and falls off about 7 to 21 days.
People with factor X deficiency may experience heavy menstrual bleeding (menorrhagia). Pregnant people are at a greater risk of complications with their pregnancies including miscarriage or heavy bleeding during birth. Some people can experience heavy bleeding in the time after delivery (postpartum hemorrhaging).

