Familial Platelet Disorder with Associated Myeloid Malignancy

synonyms:
familial platelet disorder with predisposition to acute myeloid leukemia (FPD/AML)familial platelet disorder with propensity to myeloid malignancy (FPDMM)familial platelet disorder with associated myeloid malignancyhereditary thrombocytopenia and hematological cancer predisposition syndrome associated with RUNX1aspirin-like platelet disorderfamilial thrombocytopenia with propensity to acute myelogenous leukemiaFPD/AML syndromeFPDMMFPS/AML syndromehereditary thrombocytopenia and hematological cancer predisposition syndrome associated with RUNX1platelet disorder, aspirin-like

overview:
Summary
Familial platelet disorder with associated myeloid malignancy (FPD/AML) is a very rare disorder characterized by mild to moderately low platelet count (thrombocytopenia), abnormal platelet function and an increased risk of developing other blood disorders or cancers such as myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
FPD/AML is caused by changes (variants) in theRUNX1gene. TheRUNX1gene was previously known asAML1orCBFA2. FPD/AML is an inherited disorder, meaning that theRUNX1gene variant is passed down (inherited) from an affected parent such that patients with FPD/AML are born with the disease-causing gene variant.
Platelets are a type of blood cell that help to stop bleeding. Because platelets can be low or not function properly in FPD/AML, patients can have symptoms of easy bruising and bleeding. The severity of symptoms can vary a lot between patients with FPD/AML. Some patients may have no problems with bleeding or bruising whereas other patients may seek medical attention for these reasons. All patients with FPD/AML have a high risk (35-40%) of developing MDS and/or AML in their lifetime; both of which are potentially life-threatening conditions without treatment. The average age of onset of MDS or AML is 33 years. Symptoms of MDS or AML may include tiredness (fatigue), weakness, shortness of breath and frequent infections.
Introduction
Symptoms of FPD/AML were first described in several members of a multigenerational family in 1969. In 1999 it was discovered that inherited (germline) variants in theRUNX1gene, located on chromosome 21, cause FPD/AML.

symptoms:
FPD/AML is a genetic condition that can affect the way the blood clots and increase the risk of certain blood cancers. People with FPD/AML often have problems with bleeding and bruising because their platelets—tiny cells in the blood that help stop bleeding—are either low in number or don’t work properly. Platelets are made in the bone marrow by cells called megakaryocytes. Note that not everyone with FPD/AML will have all the symptoms described below, and that some people might only have a slight decrease in their platelet count and might not have any noticeable bleeding. The severity can vary widely from person to person, even within the same family. Symptoms may include:
Easy or unexpected bruisingFrequent or severe nosebleedsProlonged or excessive bleeding after surgery or medical proceduresHeavy menstrual bleedingBleeding from the gumsSmall red spots on the skin called petechiae
In addition to the bleeding problems, people with FPD/AML have a higher risk—about 35%-40% over their lifetime– of developing certain types of blood cancers, including myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
MDS is a condition where the bone marrow doesn’t produce enough healthy blood cells. Symptoms can include feeling very tired, weakness, bruising easily and having frequent infections.
AML is a fast-growing cancer of the blood and bone marrow (the internal part of the large bones of the body that produces the blood cells). Symptoms of AML may include low blood counts, fatigue, shortness of breath, unusual bleeding or bruising, swollen gums, fevers, night sweats, weight loss and frequent infections.
Some people with FPD/AML might develop other blood cancers like T- or B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and lymphomas, as well as skin conditions like eczema or psoriasis.

