Familial Hypophosphatemia

synonyms:
hereditary type I hypophosphatemia (HPDR I)hereditary type II hypophosphatemia (HPDR II)hypophosphatemic D-resistant rickets Ihypophosphatemic D-resistant rickets IIphosphate diabetesX-linked hypophosphatemiaXLHX-linked vitamin D-resistant rickets

overview:
Familial hypophosphatemia is a term that describes a group of rare inherited disorders characterized by impaired kidney conservation of phosphate and in some cases, altered vitamin D metabolism. In contrast, other forms of hypophosphatemia may result from inadequate dietary supply of phosphate or its poor absorption from the intestines. The chronic hypophosphatemia resulting from these impairments can lead to rickets, a childhood bone disease with characteristic bow deformities of the legs, growth plate abnormalities and progressive softening of the bone, referred to as osteomalacia. In children, growth rates may be impaired, frequently resulting in short stature. In adults, the growth plate is not present so that osteomalacia is the evident bone problem. Familial hypophosphatemia is most often inherited in an X-linked dominant manner; however, autosomal dominant and recessive forms of familial hypophosphatemia occur.

symptoms:
Signs and symptoms of familial hypophosphatemia vary greatly and are usually first noticed at about eighteen months of age. Children often present with progressive bow or knock-knee deformities and/or short stature. Bone pain often develops when the child is actively engaged in physical activities. Adults may complain of osteomalacia-related pain, propensity to bone fracture, arthritis or pain related to excess mineralization of tendons at the site of muscular attachments.
Infants may have an abnormally tall, narrow head (dolichocephaly), a relative enlargement of the front-to-back dimension (scaphocephaly) or abnormally early fusion of the skull bones (craniosynostosis). Toddlers may have an abnormal “waddling” walk (gait) due to abnormally bowed legs (genu varus). In some patients, the knees are bent inwards such that they are too close together (knock knees or genu valgum). Hip deformities in which the thighbone angles towards the center of the body (coxa vara) may occur. Affected individuals often reach a shorter adult height than would otherwise be expected. In older adults, narrowing of the spine (spinal stenosis) and abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis) may occur. Osteoarthritis-like features occur frequently in adults at earlier ages than would be otherwise expected.
Symptoms such as weakness and intermittent muscle cramps may also occur, although this is not a usual finding in childhood. Cases of familial hypophosphatemia may range from mild to severe. Some individuals may have no noticeable symptoms while others may be marked by pain and/or stiffness of the back, hips and shoulders possibly limiting mobility. In later adulthood, calcification of tendons and ligaments and the development of bone spurs or bony protrusions can further limit mobility and cause pain.
Dental problems such as decay and abscesses or late eruption of teeth may develop in individuals with familial hypophosphatemia. Less frequently, affected individuals develop enamel defects and an increased frequency of cavities (caries). In some affected individuals, hearing impairment due to malformation of the inner ears (sensorineural hearing loss) may also be present.

