Familial Encephalopathy with Neuroserpin Inclusion Bodies

synonyms:
familial encephalopathy with Collins bodiesFENIB

overview:
Familial encephalopathy with neuroserpin inclusion bodies (FENIB) is a rare genetic degenerative disorder affecting the brain and spinal cord, or central nervous system (neurodegenerative disorder). Affected individuals display poor attention and concentration, declining work or academic performance, and language difficulties. Eventually, they experience a decline in their intellectual abilities (dementia). Memory, however, is relatively well-preserved early in the course of the disease compared to the severe memory deficits that are typical of Alzheimer’s disease. Some affected individuals develop additional symptoms such as uncontrolled, irregular muscle contractions and seizures. Changes in mood, such as apathy, depression, or anger frequently occur. Eventually, affected individuals require comprehensive medical care.

symptoms:
The age of onset, rate of progression, and severity of FENIB varies depending on the specific mutation in the neuroserpin gene. All individuals with a given mutation tend to become symptomatic at approximately the same age and to have similar clinical manifestations. The symptoms of FENIB may become apparent as early as the first decade or as late as the fifth or sixth decade of life. Our knowledge of FENIB is limited by the fact that only a few families with FENIB have been described.
When FENIB begins in the fifth or sixth decade, affected individuals typically experience declining cognitive function that affects their ability to work, often resulting in job loss. In addition to deficits in attention, concentration, and language usage, they may develop an impaired ability to judge the spatial relationship between objects (poor visuospatial skills). A striking finding is perseveration, a condition marked by uncontrolled, repetitive behaviors such as continually repeating a word, phrase or gesture. Daily living skills are gradually lost and they become increasingly dependent on family or other care givers. Eventually, most will require comprehensive care in a skilled nursing facility. Other symptoms may include tremor, motor restlessness, dystonia (sustained muscle contractions associated with abnormal, uncontrolled movements and postures) and occasionally seizures. The rate of decline is relatively slow, and with adequate supportive care, patients may survive for many years or even decades.
When FENIB begins earlier in life, from the first to third decade, there are additional neurological symptoms and the disease may progress quite rapidly. Seizures may be the first manifestation, including a syndrome called progressive myoclonic epilepsy (PME). The seizures may be difficult to control with medication, and episodes of status epilepticus, or persistent, repetitive seizures may occur, sometimes resulting in death. In general, an earlier age of onset is associated with more severe symptoms, and the patient may survive for only a few years.

