Familial Mediterranean Fever

synonyms:
familial paroxysmal polyserositisFMFrecurrent polyserositis

overview:
Summary
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an inherited autoinflammatory disease characterized by recurrent episodes (attacks) of fever and acute inflammation of the membranes lining the abdomen, joints and lungs. Some affected individuals may develop skin rashes (erysipelas like erythema) affecting the lower legs. Less often, inflammation of the membrane lining the heart or covering the brain and spinal cord may occur. Some individuals may develop a serious condition known as amyloidosis, in which certain proteins called amyloid accumulates in various tissues of the body. In FMF, amyloid accumulates in the kidneys (renal amyloidosis) where it can impair kidney function potentially result in life-threatening complications such as kidney failure.
The specific symptoms and severity of FMF are highly variable. Some individuals develop amyloidosis but none of the other symptoms associated with FMF. These cases are sometimes referred to as FMF type 2. FMF is caused by changes (disease-causing variants) of theMEFVgene and is usually inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Some cases of dominant inheritance have been described.
Introduction
FMF is classified as an autoinflammatory syndrome. Autoinflammatory syndromes are a group of disorders characterized by recurrent episodes of inflammation due to an abnormality of the innate immune system. They are not the same as autoimmune syndromes, in which the adaptive immune system malfunctions and mistakenly attacks healthy tissue. FMF is the most common autoinflammatory syndrome. It is also classified as a hereditary periodic fever syndrome.
Disease Course
FMF usually occurs during childhood. The inflammatory attacks last 1-3 days. The outcome is good in patients treated early. Although episodes of FMF can occur spontaneously for no identifiable reason, certain triggers have been identified in some people. These triggers include infection, trauma, vigorous exercise and stress. In females, onset of their period (menses) can trigger an episode.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of FMF can vary greatly from one person to another, even among members of the same family.
Signs and symptoms of FMF may include:
Short, recurrent episodes (attacks) of inflammation (very common symptom of classic FMF) that often occur without warning and can last anywhere from 1 to 4 days.The duration and severity of episodes (in different people and the same person) are not consistent. In between episodes, affected individuals are usually symptom-free and feel normal.The amount of time between episodes varies and can range from a week to a few months.The initial episode often occurs in infancy or early childhood. Most affected individuals experience their initial episode before the age of 20.In about 50% of cases, the person with FMF has a sensation of poor health or unpleasantness that precedes the onset of an episode, which is referred to as a prodrome or prodromal phase.Attacks can be triggered by fatigue, stress or physical effort.Recurrent fevers during early childhood (often the initial symptom of FMF) with temperatures rising rapidly often spiking to 100-104 degrees Fahrenheit (or up to >40 degrees Celsius).Episodes of fever can occur alone or in association with any or all of the symptoms discussed below.During mild episodes, fevers may occur without additional symptoms.In some individuals, recurrent fevers during childhood can be the only symptom associated with FMF.Inflammation of various serous tissues (membranes that line the abdomen, lung and heart) of the body (serositis) can occur along with chronic episodes of fever.Abdominal symptoms (in about 90% of cases) may occur that can range from mild bloating to inflammation of the lining of the abdomen (peritonitis) and may coincide with the onset of fever. Some people are misdiagnosed as having acute abdomen (peritonitis) and may undergo unnecessary surgery. These symptoms can include:Abdominal pain or tendernessAbdominal muscles noticeably rigid and tight, sometimes described as “board-like”.Distended or swollen abdomenConstipation during an abdominal episode, sometimes followed by diarrhea after an episode endsJoint pain (arthralgia) and inflammation (arthritis) due to inflammation of the membrane (synovium) lining the joints (in about 75% of the cases)Pain which can be accompanied by swelling and can be severe.During an episode, the range of motion of affected joints can be limited. Episodes of arthritis can begin suddenly and usually subside within 7 days.Joint function usually returns to normal after an episode ends but joint issues can continue for several weeks or months.In some people, episodes are triggered by minor trauma or sustained exertion such as prolonged walking.Most episodes involve one of the large joints of the leg (i.e., knee, ankle or hip).In rare cases, recurrent arthritis of one joint can be the only symptom of FMF.Chest pain due to inflammation of the thin membrane (pleura) that lines the lungs (pleuritis).Episodes usually appear suddenly and resolve quickly within 48 hours.Affected individuals can experience painful breathing and diminished breathing sounds on the affected side of the lungs.Shortness of breath and rapid, shallow breathing may also occur.
Other symptoms may include:
Painful, swollen, and bright red (erythematous) skin lesions on the lower legs resembling a skin infection called erysipelas.The lesions may be warm or hot to the touch and most often occur between the ankle and the knee.Inflammation of the sac-like membrane (pericardium) lining the heart (pericarditis) that may be associated with pain behind the breastbone (sternum) that is worse upon swallowing.Inflammation of the membranes (meninges) lining the brain and spinal cord (meningitis) may cause headaches.Headaches may also occur independent of meningitis.Muscle pain (myalgia), which is often severe and can be widespread (diffuse) and disabling.Myalgia can occur with episodes of fever and with abdominal and joint pain and diarrhea.Myalgic episodes can last for a short time or longer, even up to six to eight weeks (protracted febrile myalgia).Enlargement of the spleen can also occur (splenomegaly) and is quite frequent in children.
Some individuals with FMF may develop a potentially serious complication known as amyloidosis. Amyloidosis is characterized by the accumulation of a fatty-like substance called amyloid in various parts of the body. In FMF, amyloid accumulates in the kidneys (renal amyloidosis), impairing kidney function. Renal amyloidosis can eventually progress to cause kidney failure. The prevalence of amyloidosis varies based upon ethnicity, gender and the specific variant of theMEFVgene. Certain ethnic populations including individuals of Turkish or Sephardic Jewish descent have a relatively high incidence of amyloidosis when compared to individuals from other ethnic groups. Individuals with FMF type 2 develop amyloidosis, but none of the other symptoms associated with FMF.
Untreated individuals with FMF have a risk of infertility. Individuals with severe FMF characterized by multiple frequent episodes and/or amyloidosis are particularly at risk if untreated. In males, inflammation of the testes (orchitis) may also occur. Orchitis is characterized by pain, redness and swelling.
According to the medical literature, some individuals with FMF have an increased risk of developing additional inflammatory disorders, especially those characterized by inflammation of the blood vessels (vasculitides), including Bechet’s disease, polyarteritis nodosa and Henoch-Schonlein purpura. Affected individuals may also be at greater risk of developing ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease and rheumatoid arthritis. (For more information on these disorders, choose the specific disorder name as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)

