Familial Partial Lipodystrophy

synonyms:
FPLKobberling-Dunnigan syndromelipoatrophic diabetes

overview:
Summary
Familial partial lipodystrophy (FPL) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by selective, progressive loss of body fat (adipose tissue) from various areas of the body. Individuals with FPL often have reduced subcutaneous fat in the arms and legs and the head and trunk regions may or may not have loss of fat. Conversely, affected individuals may also have excess subcutaneous fat accumulation in other areas of the body, especially the neck, face and intra-abdominal regions. Subcutaneous fat is the fatty or adipose tissue layer that lies directly beneath the skin. In most cases, adipose tissue loss begins during puberty. FPL can be associated with a variety of metabolic abnormalities. The extent of adipose tissue loss usually determines the severity of the associated metabolic complications. These complications can include an inability to properly breakdown a simple sugar known as glucose (glucose intolerance), elevated levels of triglycerides (fat) in the blood (hypertriglyceridemia), and diabetes. Additional findings can occur in some cases. Six different subtypes of FPL have been identified. Each subtype is caused by a mutation in a different gene. Four forms of FPL are inherited as autosomal dominant traits; one form is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. The mode of inheritance of FPL, Kobberling variety is unknown.
Introduction
Lipodystrophy is a general term for a group of disorders that are characterized by complete (generalized) or partial loss of adipose tissue. In addition to FPL, there are other inherited forms of lipodystrophy. Some forms of lipodystrophy are acquired at some point during life. The degree of severity and the specific areas of the body affected can vary greatly among the lipodystrophies. Some individuals may only develop cosmetic problems; other can develop life-threatening complications. The loss of adipose tissue that characterizes these disorders is sometimes referred to as lipoatrophy rather than lipodystrophy by some physicians. FPL was first described in the medical literature in 1970s independently by three groups of physicians, including Doctors Ozer, Kobberling and Dunnigan.

symptoms:
FPL encompasses several subtypes differentiated by the underlying genetic mutation. The specific symptoms present, severity, and prognosis can vary greatly depending upon the specific type of FPL and the presence and extent of associated symptoms. The specific symptoms and severity can also vary among individuals with the same subtype and even among members of the same family. In addition, some subtypes of FPL have only been reported in a handful of individuals, which prevents physicians from developing an accurate picture of associated symptoms, severity, and prognosis. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals will not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms, and overall prognosis.
Common symptoms of FPL include selective, progressive loss of subcutaneous fat in the arms and legs and chest and trunk regions, abnormal accumulation of subcutaneous fat in other areas, and a variety of metabolic complications. Generally, women are more severely affected than men by the metabolic complications of FPL. Additional symptoms including those affecting the liver or heart may also occur.
FPL Type 2, Dunnigan Variety (FPL2)This is the most common form of FPL. Affected individuals usually have normal fat distribution during early childhood. However, around the time of puberty, fat in the arms and legs and trunk is gradually lost. In women, the loss of fat may be most striking in the buttocks and hips. At this time, fat may accumulate in other areas of the body including the face, causing a double chin, and the neck and upper back between the shoulder blades, causing a hump. Affected individuals may have a round face similar to individuals with Cushing’s syndrome. This characteristic distribution of fat and the overall muscular appearance makes the disorder more easily recognizable in women than men.
Insulin resistance is common and may be associated with a condition called acanthosis nigricans, a skin condition characterized by abnormally increased coloration (hyperpigmentation) and “velvety” thickening (hyperkeratosis) of the skin, particularly of skin fold regions, such as of the neck and groin and under the arms (axillae). An enlarged liver (hepatomegaly) is also common. Hepatomegaly is caused by the accumulation of fat in the liver (fatty liver or steatosis). Progressive accumulation of fat in the liver can cause scarring and damage to the liver (cirrhosis) and, eventually, liver dysfunction.
Other complications of insulin resistance may occur including glucose intolerance, hypertriglyceridemia, and diabetes. These symptoms are often very difficult to control and diabetes is often severe. Affected women are at a greater risk of developing diabetes than affected men and often experience more severe metabolic complications. Some individuals may experience extreme hypertriglyceridemia, resulting in episodes of acute inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis). Pancreatitis can be associated with abdominal pain, chills, jaundice, weakness, sweating, vomiting, and weight loss.
After puberty, some women with FPL may develop polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), a complex of symptoms that are not always present in every case. PCOS is often characterized by an imbalance of sex hormones as affected women may have too much androgen, a male hormone, in the body. PCOS can result in irregular menstrual periods or a lack of menstruation, oily skin that is prone to acne, cysts on the ovaries, failure of the ovary to release eggs, and mild hirsutism (a male pattern of hair growth). Hair may develop on the upper lip, chin and other parts of the body.
Individuals with FPL, Dunnigan variety are predisposed to coronary artery disease and other types of atherosclerotic vascular disease. In rare cases, in which individuals have a specific mutation of the lamin A/C (LMNA) gene, they are at an increased risk of developing disease of the heart muscles (cardiomyopathy), which can result in congestive heart failure and irregular heartbeats (cardiac arrhythmias) such as heart block or atrial fibrillation. Some individuals also develop muscular dystrophies (diseases of muscles causing loss of strength and joint contractures).
FPL Type 1, Kobberling Variety (FPL1)This form of FPL has only been reported in a handful of individuals. The symptoms are similar to those seen in FPL2, Dunnigan variety. However, fat loss is generally confined to the arms and legs. Fat loss is usually more prominent on the lower (distal) portions of the arms and legs. Affected individuals have normal or slightly increased fat distribution on the face, neck, and trunk. In addition, some affected individuals may develop excess belly fat (central obesity). Metabolic abnormalities including insulin resistance, high blood pressure (hypertension), and severe hypertriglyceridemia have also been reported. This form of FPL has only been reported in women.
FPL Type 3, due to PPARG Mutations (FPL3)This form of FPL has only been reported in approximately 30 individuals. It is generally milder than the FPL2, Dunnigan variety. Consequently, it is believed that many cases may go undiagnosed. Fat loss is more prominent in the calves and forearms than in the upper arms and thighs. Diabetes, hypertriglyceridemia, hypertension, fatty liver, pancreatitis, and hirsutism have also been reported. Metabolic abnormalities are more prominent than the lipodystrophy in this form of the disorder.
FPL4, due to PLIN1 Mutations (FPL4)This form of FPL has only been reported in a handful of individuals. Lipodystrophy is most prominent in the lower limbs and buttocks. Muscular hypertrophy may be prominent in the calves. Insulin resistance, severe hypertriglyceridemia, and diabetes were also reported.
FPL5, due to AKT2 Mutations (FPL5)This form of FPL has been reported in four members of one family who had hypertension, severe insulin resistance, and diabetes mellitus. Insulin resistance appears around the ages of 20 to 30. Lipodystrophy most prominently affects the arms and legs.
Autosomal Recessive FPL (Type 6 due to CIDEC mutation)This form of FPL has only been reported in one individual in the medical literature. The reported symptoms include partial lipodystrophy, severe insulin resistance, fatty liver, acanthosis nigricans, and diabetes.

