Familial Isolated Hypoparathyroidism

synonyms:
FIH

overview:
Familial isolated hypoparathyroidism is a group of rare genetic disorders characterized by parathyroid glands that do not produce or secrete enough parathyroid hormone to maintain normal mineral balance. The parathyroid glands are part of the endocrine system, the network of glands that regulate the chemical processes within the body controlling essential aspects of human development and metabolism throughout the lifespan. Parathyroid hormone plays a vital role in regulating the levels of calcium, magnesium, and phosphorus in the blood. Parathyroid hormone deficiency causes low levels of calcium and magnesium in the blood (hypocalcemia) and high levels of phosphorous.
Familial isolated hypoparathyroidism is caused by changes (mutations) in one of several different genes1-4. The first symptoms usually appear in infancy, childhood, or young adulthood. The most common cause of hypoparathyroidism in adults is damage to or removal of the parathyroid glands due to neck surgery.

symptoms:
The symptoms of hypoparathyroidism are predominantly due to low levels of calcium in the blood which lead to neuromuscular irritability and manifested by various symptoms which may include numbness, tingling, spasms (tetany) of the hands, feet, or face, and seizures. Other symptoms include fatigue and muscle weakness. The onset of symptoms of familial hypoparathyroidism is usually during early childhood but can occur at any time from birth to adulthood. Seizures during infancy or childhood may be the first sign of the disorder.
Chronic hypoparathyroidism in childhood may lead to the underdevelopment of the hard-outer layer of the teeth (enamel hypoplasia). Sudden, muscular spasms affecting the larynx (laryngospasm) cause the closure of the upper end of the trachea blocking normal airflow into the lungs. Affected individuals with long-standing hypoparathyroidism may develop calcium deposits in the brain or the kidneys (nephrocalcinosis).

