Fanconi Anemia

synonyms:
Fanconi pancytopeniaFA

overview:
Summary
Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare genetic disorder, in the category of inherited bone marrow failure syndromes. Half the patients are diagnosed prior to age 10, while about 10% are diagnosed as adults. Early diagnoses are facilitated in patients with birth defects, such as small size, abnormal thumbs and/or radial bones, skin pigmentation, small heads, small eyes, abnormal kidney structures, and cardiac and skeletal anomalies. The disorder is often associated with a progressive deficiency of all bone marrow production of blood cells, red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Affected individuals have an increased risk of developing a cancer of blood-forming cells in the bone marrow called acute myeloid leukemia (AML), or tumors of the head, neck, skin, gastrointestinal system, or genital tract. FA occurs equally in males and females, and is found in all ethnic groups. It is usually inherited as an autosomal recessive genetic disorder, but X-linked inheritance has also been reported.
Introduction
There are several subtypes of FA that result from the inheritance of two gene mutations in each of at least 18 different genes. Most of the subtypes share the characteristic symptoms and findings. Fanconi anemia is not the same as Fanconi syndrome, a rare kidney function disorder.

symptoms:
The symptoms of FA vary from person to person. Identified symptoms include a variety of physical abnormalities, bone marrow failure, and an increased risk of malignancy. Physical abnormalities normally reveal themselves in early childhood, but in rare cases diagnoses are made in adulthood. Blood production problems often develop between 6 to 8 years of age. Bone marrow failure eventually occurs in the majority of affected individuals, although the progression and age of onset vary. Patients who live into adulthood are likely to develop head and neck, gynecologic, and/or gastrointestinal cancer at a much earlier age than the general population, whether or not they had earlier blood problems.
Physical AbnormalitiesAt least 60% of individuals affected with FA are born with at least one physical anomaly. This may include any of the following:
-short stature-thumb and arm anomalies: an extra or misshaped or missing thumbs and fingers or an incompletely developed or missing radius (one of the forearm bones)-skeletal anomalies of the hips, spine, or ribs-kidney structural problems-skin pigmentation (called café au lait spots)-small head-small, crossed, or widely spaced eyes-low birth weight-gastrointestinal difficulties-small reproductive organs in males-defects in tissues separating chambers of the heart
Individuals with anemia may experience tiredness, increased need for sleep, weakness, lightheadedness, dizziness, irritability, headaches, pale skin color, difficulty breathing, and cardiac symptoms.
There may be excessive bruising following minimal injury and spontaneous bleeding from the mucous membranes, especially those of the gums and nose.
Bone Marrow FailureBone marrow is the spongy substance found in the center of the long bones of the body. The bone marrow produces specialized cells (hematopoietic stem cells) that grow and eventually develop into red blood cells (erythrocytes), white blood cells (leukocytes), and platelets. The cells are released into the bloodstream to travel throughout the body performing their specific functions. Red blood cells deliver oxygen to the body, white blood cells help in fighting off infections and platelets allow the body to form clots to stop bleeding.
Progressive bone marrow failure typically presents by the age of 10 and is usually accompanied with low platelet levels or low white blood cells. By age 40 to 50 years, the estimated incidence of bone marrow failure as the first serious event is more than 50%.
Affected individuals develop low levels of all the cellular elements of the bone marrow- red and white blood cells and platelets- which can lead to the following:-low level of circulating red blood cells – anemia-low level of white blood cells – leukopenia-low level of neutrophils (a type of white blood cell) – neutropenia-low level of platelets – thrombocytopenia
Increased Risk of MalignancyIndividuals with FA have a higher risk than the general population of developing certain forms of cancer including acute myeloid leukemia and specific solid tumors. Affected individuals may are at extremely high risk of developing cancer affecting the head and neck region, gastrointestinal tract, esophagus or gynecologic regions. Most of these are a specific form of cancer, known as squamous cell carcinoma. FA patients whose bone marrow failure is treated with male hormones (called “androgens”) have in increased risk of liver tumors.
In approximately 30 percent of cases associated with cancer, the development of malignancy precedes a diagnosis of FA.

