Fatal Familial Insomnia

synonyms:
FFI

overview:
SummaryFatal familial insomnia (FFI) is a rare genetic degenerative brain disorder. It is characterized by an inability to sleep (insomnia) that may be initially mild, but progressively worsens, leading to significant physical and mental deterioration. Affected individuals may also develop dysfunction of the autonomic nervous system, the part of the nervous system that controls involuntary or automatic body processes – which are things that happen without a person thinking about them, such as body temperature regulation, sweating, breathing or regulating the heart rate. Specific symptoms depend on the part of the autonomic nervous system that is affected by the disease. In all instances, FFI is caused by an abnormal variant in the prion-related protein (PRNP) gene, although sometimes, the disorder occurs randomly, without a variantPRNPgene (sporadic fatal insomnia, or SFI). ThePRNPgene regulates the production of human prion protein. Alterations in this gene lead to the generation of abnormally shaped (misfolded) prion protein, also known simply as a “prion”, which is toxic to the body. In FFI, the abnormal prions build up primarily within the thalamus of the brain. This leads to the progressive loss of nerve cells (neurons) and the various symptoms associated with this disorder. There is no cure, but investigators are researching ways to best treat and manage FFI.
IntroductionFFI is classified as a transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE) or a prion disease. Prion diseases are caused by the accumulation of misfolded prion proteins in the brain. Two other prion diseases, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker syndrome, may also occur because of variations of thePRNPgene, although some prion diseases occur in the absence of a genetic variation. Generally, prion disorders are characterized by long incubation periods and short clinical duration, which means the abnormal prions may accumulate for many years without causing symptoms (long incubation period), but once symptoms begin the disorder rapidly worsens.

symptoms:
The characteristic symptom in FFI is progressive insomnia. Insomnia often begins during middle age, but it can occur earlier or later in life. Insomnia may first be mild, but it then becomes progressively worse until an affected individual gets very little sleep. Insomnia usually begins suddenly and can rapidly worsen over the next few months. When sleep is achieved, vivid dreams may occur. The lack of sleep leads to physical and mental deterioration and the disease ultimately progresses to coma and death.
Although insomnia is usually the first symptom, some individuals may present with progressive dementia, in which there are worsening problems with thought, cognition, memory, language and behavior. Initially, the signs may be subtle and include unintended weight loss, forgetfulness, inattentiveness, problems concentrating or speech problems. Episodes of confusion or hallucinations can eventually occur.
Some affected individuals experience double vision (diplopia) or abnormal, jerky eye movements (nystagmus). There may be problems with swallowing (dysphagia) or slurred speech (dysarthria). Some individuals eventually have trouble coordinating voluntary movements (ataxia). Abnormal movements including tremors or twitchy, jerking muscle spasms (myoclonus), or Parkinson’s-like symptoms may also develop.
Additional symptoms involving dysfunction of the autonomic nervous system often develop. Specific symptoms can vary from one person to another based on the specific part of the autonomic nervous system affected. Common symptoms can include fever, rapid heart rate (tachycardia), high blood pressure (hypertension), increased sweating (hyperhidrosis), increased production of tears, constipation, variations in body temperature and sexual dysfunction including erectile dysfunction. Anxiety and depression are common findings as well.

