Felty Syndrome

synonyms:
Splenomegaly with Rheumatoid Arthritis

overview:
Felty syndrome is usually described as associated with or a complication of rheumatoid arthritis. This disorder is generally defined by the presence of three conditions: rheumatoid arthritis (RA), an enlarged spleen (spenomelgaly) and a low white blood cell count (neutropenia). The presence of RA gives rise to painful, stiff and swollen joints. A low white blood cell count, especially when accompanied by an abnormally large spleen, leads to a greater chance for infections. Other symptoms associated with Felty syndrome may include fatigue, fever, weight loss, and/or discoloration of patches of skin (brown pigmentation). The exact cause of Felty syndrome is unknown. It is believed to be an autoimmune disorder that may be genetically transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait.

symptoms:
The symptoms of Felty syndrome are similar to those of rheumatoid arthritis.  Patients suffer from painful, stiff, and swollen joints, most commonly in the joints of the hands, feet, and arms.  In some affected individuals, Felty syndrome may develop during a period when the symptoms and physical findings associated with rheumatoid arthritis have subsided or are not present.  In this case, Felty syndrome may remain undiagnosed.  In more rare instances, the development of Felty syndrome may precede the development of the symptoms and physical findings associated with rheumatoid arthritis.
Felty syndrome is also characterized by an abnormally enlarged spleen (splenomegaly) and abnormally low levels of certain white blood cells (neutropenia).  As a result of neutropenia, affected individuals are increasingly susceptible to certain infections.
Individuals with Felty syndrome may also experience fever, weight loss, and/or fatigue.  In some cases, affected individuals may have discoloration of the skin, particularly of the leg (abnormal brown pigmentation), sores (ulcers) on the lower leg, and/or an abnormally large liver (hepatomegaly).  In addition, affected individuals may have abnormally low levels of circulating red blood cells (anemia), a decrease in circulating blood platelets that assist in blood clotting functions (thrombocytopenia), and/or inflammation of the blood vessels (vasculitis).  (For more information on this disorder, choose “Vasculitis” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)  In rare cases, eye abnormalities have been associated with Felty syndrome.

