Femoral Facial Syndrome

synonyms:
femoral dysgenesis, bilateralfemoral dysgenesis, bilateral-Robin anomalyfemoral hypoplasia-unusual facies syndromeFFSisolated femoral hypoplasia

overview:
Summary
Femoral facial syndrome (FFS) is a rare disorder that occurs randomly (sporadically) in the population. There have been, however, two patients reported in which the disorder appeared to be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. The major symptoms of this disorder are underdeveloped thigh bones (femoral hypoplasia) and unusual facial features.
Introduction
FFS is included in the “limb hypoplasia-reduction defects group” according to thenewerclassification of genetic skeletal disorders.

symptoms:
Femoral facial syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by underdeveloped thigh bones (femurs) and unusual facial characteristics. Patients have a very broad range and variety of symptoms. One source lists 31 clinical signs, classified as very frequent, relatively frequent and less frequent.
Clinical signs characterized as very frequent are (80-99%):
– Cleft palate– Femur absent/abnormal– Unusually small and/or retracted jaw (micrognathia/retrognathia)– Short limbs (micromelia, femur especially)– Abnormal vertebral size or shape
Clinical signs characterized as relatively frequent are (20-30%):
– Upwardly slanting eyelids (upslanted fissures)– Thin lips + Long vertical groove in the middle of the upper lip (philtrum)– Low-set and poorly formed ears / Small or virtually absent ears (microtia/anotia)– Fused bones of the spine (sacrum and coccyx)– Short stature (dwarfism)– Hip dysplasia– Femoral neck anomaly (coxa vara)– Abnormal fibula morphology– Deformation of the foot that may be turned outward or inward (talipes-equinovarus)– Extra toes (preaxial foot polydactyly)– Maternal diabetes
Clinical signs characterized as less frequent are (5-29%):
– Cross sided eyes (strabismus)– Sprengel anomaly– Rib fusion– Radius and ulna bone fusion (radioulnar synostosis)– Scoliosis– Underdeveloped kidneys (renal hypoplasia)– Kidney function anomaly (polycystic kidney dysplasia)– Enlarged penis– Enlarged heart ventricles (ventriculomegaly)– Cerebral (brain) structural abnormalities that can be seen in imaging tests.
Facial differences appear to be very variable, ranging from an evident Pierre Robin sequence with malformed ears to more subtle features. The more constant feature seems to be a small jaw (micrognathia). Pierre Robin sequence is characterized by micrognathia (which causes backward displacement of the tongue and upper airway obstruction that can lead to breathing problems) and usually a cleft palate.

