Fetal Valproate Syndrome

synonyms:
valproic acid embryopathysusceptibility to valproate embryopathyfetal valproic acid syndromeFVS

overview:
Summary
Fetal valproate syndrome (FVS) is a rare condition that is caused by exposure of the unborn baby to valproic acid or sodium valproate (VPA) during the first three months of pregnancy (the first trimester). VPA is a medication used to treat certain types of seizures (epilepsy), bipolar disorder and migraines. Although many babies exposed to VPA are born healthy, a small percentage of pregnant women who take this medication can have a baby born with FVS. The exact prevalence of this condition remains to be established. Symptoms of this condition may include neural tube defects such as spina bifida, distinctive facial features, congenital heart defects and other musculoskeletal abnormalities.
Introduction
Anti-seizure medications, also known as antiepileptic or anticonvulsant medications are among the most common teratogens prescribed to women of childbearing age. Prenatal exposure to VPA causes teratogenic effects in the fetus, specifically FVS. A teratogen is a drug that interferes with the development of a fetus. Studies have indicated that FVS is associated with greater risk of neurological and cognitive abnormalities than other anti-seizure medications.

symptoms:
The use of VPA as a single drug (monotherapy) in the first trimester of pregnancy was associated with significantly increased risks of major and minor malformations, including a 20-fold increase in neural tube defects (NTDs) such as spina bifida, cleft lip and palate, cardiovascular abnormalities, genitourinary defects, developmental delay, endocrine disorders, limb defects, and autism as compared with no-use of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) or with use of other AEDs.
Spina bifida is a birth defect where there is the incomplete closure of bony spine. It occurs when the tube of tissue that lies along the center of the early embryo (neural tube) does not completely fuse during fetal growth. Part of the contents of the spinal canal may protrude through this opening (bifida cystica). Depending on the severity of the opening, a variety of neurological and physical symptoms may occur. (For more information on this disorder choose “spina bifida” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
Distinctive facial features are characteristic of FVS. Infants with FVS may have a vertical fold of skin on either side of the nose that forms a groove under the eye (epicanthal folds); a small, upturned nose with a flat bridge; a small mouth (microstomia); a long, thin, upper lip; a downturned mouth; and/or minor abnormalities of the ears.
Other abnormalities that may be found in a few affected individuals include: underdeveloped nails of the fingers and toes; dislocation of the hip; long, thin fingers and toes (arachnodactyly); overlapping fingers and toes; separation of the rectus muscle of the abdominal wall (diastasis recti); absence of the first rib; a condition in which the urinary opening is on the underside of the penis (hypospadias); abnormalities of the heart; softening of the windpipe (tracheomalacia); and/or a club foot.
Children with FVS have a higher chance of developmental problems such as decreased cognitive function, attention deficit disorder, learning difficulties and often the communication problems of autism spectrum disorder.
Growth deficiency and an unusually small head (microcephaly) may also occur when VPA is taken alone or in combination with other antiepileptic drugs during pregnancy.

