Fetal Retinoid Syndrome

synonyms:
Accutane embryopathyAccutane-exposed pregnanciesAccutane, fetal effects ofIsotretinoin embryopathyIsotretinoin, fetal effects ofIsotretinoin teratogen syndromeRetinoic acid embryopathy

overview:
Fetal retinoid syndrome is a pattern of mental and physical birth defects (congenital malformations) that can result from a mother taking retinoids during pregnancy. The absolute risk of congenital malformations following oral isotretinoin therapy is currently unclear. Overall malformation rates in liveborn infants from prospectively reported pregnancies range from 5% to 20%.
Retinoids are the synthetic (man-made) forms of vitamin A used to treat various skin (dermatological) conditions. The most well-known retinoid is isotretinoin (commonly referred to by one of its former brand names, Accutane or Roaccutane, a drug used to treat severe cystic acne. Isotretinoin and its commercially available brands, although effective in the treatment of acne, can cause developmental abnormalities in the fetus (teratogenic effects) and therefore should not be used during pregnancy due to the risk of birth defects. The range and severity of associated abnormalities are variable and dependent on timing of exposure in pregnancy. However, characteristic features may include malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region; central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities; heart abnormalities; and/or additional physical findings. Additional anomalies may include renal, thymus gland abnormality and parathyroid gland abnormalities.

symptoms:
Characteristic features of infants with fetal retinoid syndrome include abnormalities of the craniofacial region, CNS and cardiovascular system. The specific symptoms and physical findings can vary from one infant to another. Affected infants may not have all the symptoms listed below.
Craniofacial differencesSome affected infants may have small heads (microcephaly) and small, low-set ears (microtia) with narrowing (stenosis) of the ear canals or are born missing ears. Abnormalities of the middle and inner ears may also be present including hearing loss. Additional craniofacial findings include widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate), an abnormal groove in the upper lip (cleft lip) and/or underdevelopment of the middle area of the face (midface hypoplasia). Some affected infants may experience paralysis (palsy) of certain facial nerves.
Cardiovascular abnormalitiesPotential cardiovascular abnormalities following retinoid exposure include structural (anatomical) malformations of the heart such as transposition of the great vessels; hypoplastic left heart syndrome; ventricular septal defects (VSDs) and tetralogy of Fallot.
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome is characterized by underdevelopment of the left ventricle, the aortic and/or mitral valves and the ascending aorta.
VSDs are abnormal openings that may occur in any portion of the ventricular septum, the fibrous partition that divides the heart’s two lower pumping chambers (ventricles). The size and location of the defect will determine the severity of symptoms. Small VSDs may close without treatment or become less significant as affected infants mature and grow. If a moderately-sized defect is present, the heart may be unable to pump blood effectively, resulting in an abnormally rapid rate of breathing (tachypnea), wheezing, an unusually fast heartbeat (tachycardia) and/or failure to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive). In some children, without appropriate treatment, large VSDs may cause life-threatening complications during infancy.
Tetralogy of Fallot is a rare form of cyanotic heart disease. Cyanosis is the abnormal bluish discoloration of the skin and mucous membranes (lips and tongue) that occurs due to low levels of circulating oxygen in the blood. Tetralogy of Fallot consists of a combination of four different heart defects: a ventricular septal defect; obstructed outflow of blood from the right ventricle to the lungs due to an abnormal narrowing of the opening between the pulmonary artery and the right ventricle of the heart (pulmonary stenosis); a displaced aorta that causes blood to flow into the aorta from both the right and left ventricles and abnormal enlargement of the right ventricle.
CNS abnormalitiesSome infants with fetal retinoid syndrome may develop CNS abnormalities including hydrocephalus, a condition in which accumulation of excessive cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the skull causes pressure on the tissues of the brain, resulting in a variety of symptoms. In some children, the forebrain (prosencephalon) may fail to develop resulting in holoprosencephaly.
Infants with fetal retinoid syndrome may have neurodevelopmental delays, for example, they may have learning disabilities and have delays in reaching developmental milestones such as sitting or crawling.
Affected infants may also develop a condition known as microcephaly, where the head circumference is smaller than would be expected for their age and gender due to developmental issues. This can also result in developmental and intellectual disabilities. Additional complications that may arise due to microcephaly include balance and coordination problems as well as seizures.
Additional abnormalitiesInfants with fetal retinoid syndrome may experience abnormalities of thymus function. The thymus gland is located below the thyroid gland in the neck in front of the chest and is the primary gland of the lymphatic system. The thymus gland makes white blood cells needed to protect the body from infection.
Other reported abnormalities include webbing of the fingers (syndactyly), skeletal malformations affecting the legs and spine, and/or low muscle tone (hypotonia). Some infants may also develop eye problems such as microphthalmia, a condition where one or both eyeballs are very small, leading to possible vision loss. Some infants are born with their eyes missing (anophthalmia).

