Fetal and Neonatal Alloimmune Thrombocytopenia

synonyms:
FNAITneonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia (NAIT)fetomaternal alloimmune thromobocytopenia (FMAIT)

overview:
Summary

Fetal and neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia (FNAIT) is a rare immune disorder. FNAIT occurs when the baby’s platelets are attacked and destroyed by the mother’s immune cells in her blood stream. This occurs when platelets from the baby are identified as foreign and the mother develops an antibody response against them. This immune response can develop when the mother’s blood is exposed to her baby’s blood, either during development of the fetus in the womb or when the baby is being born. FNAIT can occur in a woman’s first pregnancy and/or in subsequent pregnancies.
A mother’s immune system attacks her baby’s platelets if they are recognized as foreign. A baby’s platelets may be recognized as foreign when they’re different from the mother’s platelets because of genes inherited from the father. Platelets are a type of blood cell that helps blood clot. An abnormally low level of platelets (thrombocytopenia) can lead to easy bleeding and rupture of blood vessels.

Introduction

FNAIT was first reported in the medical literature in 1953. Antigens, or targets for the immune system on platelet cells, were first described in the 1950s and 1960s. As of 2022, 35 different platelet-specific antigens in FNAIT have been described. FNAIT is the leading cause of severe thrombocytopenia in newborns.

symptoms:
Signs and symptoms of FNAIT vary depending on how low the platelet levels drop in the baby due to increased platelet destruction and reduced platelet production. Signs and symptoms may occur before birth or up to four weeks after birth.
Many babies with FNAIT have mild symptoms and some babies may have no signs of the disease other than low platelet levels. The most common sign is skin discolorations called petechiae and purpura, which occur from bleeding under the skin. Petechiae are pinpoint spots on the skin that are often redder in color than purpura, which are larger areas of skin discoloration that tend to be more purple in color. These skin discolorations may occur on much of the body and typically appear within a few hours after birth. Easy formation of severe bruises, or hematomas, may also occur. When symptoms are mild, they will eventually disappear with time and after treatment.
Babies with a severe case of FNAIT may have bleeding in major organs, such as the brain, gastrointestinal tract, lungs or eyes. Bleeding in the brain is known as intracranial hemorrhage (ICH). Severe symptoms can cause death or lead to life-long disability.
Typically, babies with a severe case also have signs of petechiae or purpura along with cephalohematoma, a condition where blood collects under the scalp, resulting in a bulge on the baby’s head. Cephalohematoma is associated with an increased risk for ICH, which can lead to long-term neurological abnormalities due to brain damage. Neurological deficits can include cerebral palsy, intellectual disability, seizures and a type of hearing loss known as bilateral sensorineural hearing loss that occurs in both ears. Cerebral palsy includes permanent disorders of posture and movement that do not worsen with time. This is the same as a hemorrhagic stroke in an adult.
The severity of thrombocytopenia does not accurately predict whether a baby will develop ICH. Only a small portion of babies with severely low platelet levels develop ICH and ICH may develop in some babies with only moderately low platelet levels.
Without treatment, ICH is estimated to affect up to 26% of babies with FNAIT. Most of these cases are thought to occur before birth and in firstborn children, before a mother is aware of FNAIT. When a mother has one child with FNAIT with ICH as a symptom, her next child with FNAIT has a high risk of ICH as well.
The gastrointestinal tract is the second most common body system where bleeding occurs. Signs can include bloody stools. Bleeding can also occur in the lungs and eyes. Bleeding in the eyes can lead to blindness.
Mothers of children with FNAIT may have a higher risk for miscarriage.

