Fibrous Dysplasia

synonyms:
FDfibrous dysplasia of boneJaffe-Lichtenstein disease

overview:
Summary
Fibrous dysplasia (FD) is a rare bone disorder. Bone affected by this disorder is replaced by abnormal scar-like (fibrous) connective tissue. This abnormal fibrous tissue weakens the bone, making it abnormally fragile and prone to fracture. Pain may occur in the affected areas. As children grow, affected bone may become misshapen (dysplastic). FD may only affect one solitary bone (monostotic disease) or the disorder can be widespread, affecting multiple bones throughout the body (polyostotic disease). The severity of the disorder can vary greatly from one person to another. Any part of the skeleton can be affected, but the long bones of the legs, the bones of the face and skull (craniofacial area), and the ribs are most often affected. FD is usually diagnosed in children or young adults, but mild cases may go undiagnosed until adulthood. In some cases, FD may not require treatment; in other cases, certain medications and surgical procedures may be recommended.
Introduction
FD was first described in the medical literature in 1938 by Dr. Lichtenstein and in 1942 by Drs. Lichtenstein and Jaffe. Fibrous dysplasia can occur as part of a larger disorder such as McCune-Albright syndrome (fibrous dysplasia-café au lait spots-endocrine dysfunction) or Mazabraud syndrome (fibrous dysplasia-myxomas). The term Jaffe-Lichtenstein syndrome is sometimes used synonymously with monostotic FD or to denote cases of polyostotic FD with café au lait spots, but no endocrine dysfunction. These disorders most likely represent a spectrum of disease associated with activating mutations of theGNAS1gene.

symptoms:
The severity and specific symptoms of FD can vary greatly from one person to another. Most affected individuals only have one bone involved and often there are no associated symptoms (asymptomatic). Many times, FD is discovered incidentally when x-rays are performed for another reason. Conversely, some affected individuals can have multiple bones affected and develop severe and potentially disabling or disfiguring symptoms. In most affected individuals, onset of symptoms is usually in childhood; it is unusual for the onset of the disorder to occur after 10.
FD is a benign (noncancerous) disorder and does not spread. The bone or bones that are affected by the disorder are usually established early in life and it is very rare for new areas to become affected. The areas affected may be described as lesions. FD lesions may progressively grow and expand until an affected bone finishes growing. These lesions can eventually cause affected bones to become abnormally weakened, misshapen, and prone to facture. Bone pain can also occur and may be severe in some patients.
Specific symptoms associated with FD depend upon the specific bones involved. Any part of the skeleton can potentially be affected, but the long bones of the arms and legs, the bones of the face and skull (craniofacial area), and the ribs are most often affected. Monostotic FD often presents as a painless swelling on the ribs. FD affecting the spine can cause abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis). When the long bones of the legs are affected, this can lead to frequent fractures due to weight bearing when walking or standing. Additionally, the long bones can eventually become bowed. In children, their legs may not be of equal length (limb length discrepancy). Eventually, this can affect a person’s ability to walk, causing an abnormal gait (e.g. walking with a limp).
FD of the craniofacial region can cause a variety of symptoms depending on the type and specific location of the lesions(s). Such symptoms can include pain, nasal congestion, misaligned or displaced teeth, uneven jaws, and facial asymmetry, in which one side of the face does not match the other side. FD in the craniofacial region can alter the facial features resulting in an abnormally prominent forehead (frontal bossing), bulging eyes (proptosis), and difference in the vertical positions of the eyes so that the eyes are uneven (vertical dystopia). The degree of facial abnormality can vary greatly from one person to another. The shape of the skull may be altered in certain cases.
FD can potentially cause a variety of neurological symptoms as areas of abnormal tissue development can compress nearby nerves. Specific symptoms are related to the specific nerves involved. For example, vision loss and hearing impairment can occur because of compression of optic and auditory nerves in the skull. However, vision loss and hearing impairment only occur in rare instances.
The abnormal structure of affected bone can lead to degenerative arthritis in adjacent joints.
Women with FD may be at risk of increased pain during pregnancy because of the estrogen receptors found in FD.
Although the term tumor may be used to describe FD lesions, these growths are benign (non-cancerous). Only in extremely rare cases do FD lesions become cancerous (malignant transformation). These malignant tumors developed in individuals who had been radiated for bone pain; a treatment option that has been abandoned.

