Fibromuscular Dysplasia

synonyms:
FMD

overview:
Fibromuscular dysplasia, commonly called FMD, is a disease that causes one or more arteries in the body to have abnormal cell development in the artery wall. As a result, areas of narrowing (stenosis), aneurysms, or tears (dissection) may occur. If narrowing or a tear causes a decrease in blood flow through the artery, symptoms may result. FMD is most commonly found in the arteries that supply the kidneys with blood (renal arteries) and the arteries called the carotid and vertebral arteries which are found in the neck and supply the brain with blood. Less commonly, FMD affects the arteries in the abdomen (supplying the liver, spleen and intestines) and extremities (legs and arms). In more than one-half of people with this disease, there will be evidence of FMD in more than one artery.
Recently, studies have shown that some women who were healthy and who have a sudden tearing of a coronary artery (called sudden coronary artery dissection or “SCAD”) probably have undiagnosed FMD. SCAD was previously thought to be a separate condition to FMD, but now we are starting to understand that many people have FMD as the main reason for their coronary tear.

symptoms:
Some people with this disease do not have symptoms or findings on a physical examination. The signs and/or symptoms that a person with FMD may experience depend on the arteries affected and whether there is narrowing, tears, or aneurysms within them. Any pain or clinical sign related to FMD typically comes from the organ that is supplied by that artery. For example, FMD in the kidney arteries may cause high blood pressure. FMD in the carotid arteries may cause headaches or a swooshing sound in the ears (called pulsatile tinnitus). Some patients with FMD may have no symptoms at all but are diagnosed with this disease when a physician hears a noise over one of the arteries due to disturbed or turbulent blood flow within the vessel. This noise is known as a bruit.
A person with severe carotid FMD causing severe narrowing or a tear in a carotid or vertebral artery may have neurologic symptoms involving the facial nerves (drooping of the eye lid, unequal size of the pupils, for example), stroke or transient ischemic attack. People with carotid FMD have a higher risk for aneurysms of the arteries in the brain (intracranial aneurysms). Bleeding in the brain (intracranial hemorrhage) may occur if an aneurysm ruptures, and it is important to identify and treat brain aneurysms early to prevent this.
FMD involving the arteries that supply the intestines, liver and spleen with blood (mesenteric arteries) can result in abdominal pain after eating and unintended weight loss. FMD in the arms and legs can cause limb discomfort with exercise or can lead to unequal blood pressures in the arms.

