Fibrolamellar Carcinoma

synonyms:
fibrolamellar carcinoma or cancer (FLC)fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma (FL-HCC)

overview:
Fibrolamellar carcinoma is a rare form of cancer that affects the liver. Unlike most cancers of the liver, it occurs with greater frequency in adolescents and young adults who are otherwise healthy. There are often no symptoms or signs of the disorder for a long time. Symptoms that can develop include abdominal pain, unintended weight loss, and a general feeling of poor health (malaise). Treatment is usually through surgical removal (resection) of the tumor. When surgery is not possible or is unsuccessful, then other therapies may be considered. Recurrence following successful surgical removal of a tumor can occur, meaning that sometimes the tumor can come back after it was removed. The exact, underlying cause of this disorder is unknown.
The term fibrolamellar comes from the fibrous bands of tissue that occur in a unique “lamellar” pattern when tissue from a tumor is viewed under a microscope. Fibrolamellar carcinoma was first reported in the medical literature in 1956 and described as a different type of liver cancer from the more common kind of liver cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Most people with HCC have an underlying liver disease called cirrhosis, which is scarring of the liver that can occur as a result of long term liver damage due to hepatitis or alcohol use. Most people with fibrolamellar carcinoma do not have an underlying liver disease and do not have cirrhosis. Many physicians now consider fibrolamellar carcinoma a separate form of cancer distinct from HCC.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms usually arise with advanced disease. For many years, affected individuals may not have any noticeable signs or symptoms (asymptomatic) because they are otherwise healthy. Initial symptoms are nonspecific, which means they can be seen in a variety of different medical conditions. Every person is unique and how this disorder affects one person can be different from how it affects another person. Fibrolamellar carcinoma may not cause problems for many, many years or it can be aggressive, quickly spreading locally or spreading to other parts of the body (metastasizing).
When symptoms do develop, they can include abdominal pain or discomfort, unintended weight loss, and a general feeling of poor health (malaise). Abdominal pain is the most common symptom, although it can vary in both duration and intensity. Additional symptoms can include shoulder or back pain, fever, nausea or vomiting, loss of appetite, night sweats, the accumulation of fluid in the abdominal cavity causing swelling of the abdomen (ascites), enlargement or swelling (distention) of the abdomen, a feeling of fullness in the stomach, and enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly). Sometimes, there is a mass in the liver that can be felt by touch (palpable). Yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice) can also occur and is usually caused by blockage (obstruction) of the biliary tract, which includes the liver, gallbladder, and biliary ducts. These organs and structures help to regulate and release bile, which is made by the liver to help with digestion.
A rare finding that has been reported is gynecomastia, a condition characterized by an increase in breast tissues in males. Other uncommon findings are low blood sugar levels (hypoglycemia) because the tumor uses up glucose in the body, or changes in mental status such as confusion due to the buildup of ammonia in the body.

