Fibrosing Mediastinitis

synonyms:
mediastinal fibrosissclerosing mediastinitisFM

overview:
Fibrosing mediastinitis (FM) is a rare disease characterized by dense invasive fibrotic infiltration of the mediastinum (middle portion of the chest, situated between the lungs) and/or hilar regions (areas between the upper and lower lobes of each lung) of the chest causing narrowing or occlusion of important chest structures, including pulmonary arteries, pulmonary veins, the superior vena cava, airways/bronchi, or the esophagus. Because of the vital nature of these structures, this slowly progressive disease is associated with significant morbidity and can be fatal if it affects both lungs.
There are two recognized subtypes of FM: 1) post-Histoplasmafibrosing mediastinitis (PHFM) and 2) idiopathic FM. The former is thought to represent an aberrantly prolonged and robust immune reaction to a remote infection with the soil-based fungusHistoplasma capsulatum, perhaps related to ongoing reaction to residual fungal antigens found within lymph nodes regions of the central chest. The latter is even rarer and is associated with IgG4-related disease, ANCA vasculitis, and rare histiocytic disorders.
Both subtypes of FM are rare. Symptoms typically do not develop until the disease has progressed to the point of causing severe compromise of blood flow within an affected vessel or air flow within an affected central airway. The build-up of scar tissue usually occurs very slowly (1 mm/year), though more rapid growth has been observed occasionally. Symptoms may appear suddenly, even though the process has progressed slowly for years, once a critical limitation of blood/air flow occurs. The growth of mediastinal scar tissue itself causes no symptoms.
Histoplasmosis is caused by the most common endemic parasitic fungus in the United States,Histoplasma capsulatum. It resides in soil and thrives when specific conditions with respect to acidity, temperature, nitrogen content, and humidity are present, resulting in large geographic areas of endemicity, most notably along the Mississippi and Ohio River valleys. It also occasionally causes disease in Central and South America.Histoplasmaspecies are also found in Europe, Asia, Africa, and Australia, though histoplasmosis is less prevalent in these regions. It also flourishes in soil fertilized by bird droppings and is found in bat guano; chicken houses and caves or bridge underpasses contaminated with guano are notorious sources of H.capsulatuminfection. In urban settings, most exposure is probably related to soil disruption leading to fungal spores becoming airborne. The inhaled fungus typically causes a limited, asymptomatic infection. A minority will experience nonspecific upper respiratory or flu-like symptoms, with progressive pneumonia requiring antifungal treatment being uncommon. Disseminated / systemic infection is rare and most often observed in those who are severely immunocompromised. In endemic areas in the United States, nearly all persons are exposed/infected in childhood.
It is not known why some individuals develop an excessively exuberant immune response to the organism, leading to the excessive scarring and obstruction of vessels or airways that characterizes FM. Fungal yeast forms have been observed to persist within mediastinal lymph nodes; these specimens almost never grow in culture, indicating they most likely represent long-dead fungus, but the continued presence of fungal antigens within or around these fungal forms may stimulate an ongoing immune response in some individuals. Calcification of formerly infected lymph nodes is typical but may require years to develop. Calcifications are also frequently observed within the abnormal mediastinal tissue of PHFM.

symptoms:
Typically, people with PHFM were originally exposed/infected withH. capsulatumas children but the symptoms begin in most patients in the third or fourth decade of life. No evidence suggests an association with specific ancestry or gender. Patients may present with shortness of breath (dyspnea), fatigue or loss of stamina, cough with blood (hemoptysis) or without, chronic chest (pleuritic) pain, recurrent pulmonary infections or pneumonias, difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), or swelling of the arms and face. These symptoms most commonly occur because there is an occlusion or critical narrowing of one of the main vessels in the chest, such as the superior vena cava (the vein which returns blood from the head, neck, and arms the heart), pulmonary arteries, and/or pulmonary veins. Superior vena cava (SVC) syndrome, characterized by face and arm swelling due to obstruction of the vena cava, is a common symptom. Some patients do not develop this syndrome despite having obstruction of the SVC because collateral alternative veins (sometimes visible on the anterior chest) enlarge sufficiently to bypass the SVC as it becomes slowly obstructed and successfully return blood to the heart. Cough and shortness of breath are the most common symptoms when obstruction of a central airway occurs. Pulmonary venous obstruction usually presents with shortness of breath, coughing blood, or sometimes collection of fluid in the space between the lung and the chest wall (pleural effusion). Symptoms can be present for years before diagnosis.
Patients with idiopathic FM may present symptoms of fever, chills, sweats, shortness of breath, cough, or chest pain. They may also have fibrosis or inflammation elsewhere in the body which may cause symptoms at those other sites.

