Fibrillary Glomerulonephritis

synonyms:
fibrillary GNnon-amyloid fibrillary glomerulopathyCongo red-negative amyloidosis-like glomerulopathydon-amyloid fibrillary glomerulonephritis

overview:
Summary
Fibrillary glomerulonephritis (GN) is an uncommon kidney disease of the glomerulus, the site where waste is filtered from the body. Unusual fibril proteins plug the glomerulus, causing it to become inflamed. It mostly affects middle-aged adults between 41 and 80 years and can cause blood and protein in the urine (hematuria and proteinuria, respectively), which makes the urine look red or foamy. Other symptoms include decreased kidney function (renal insufficiency), swelling in the legs or feet and high blood pressure (hypertension). It is diagnosed with a kidney biopsy. While the exact cause is unknown, it is often found in patients with a history of other diseases including cancer, autoimmune diseases, hepatitis C, hypertension and diabetes. Treatment is typically aimed at the associated diseases since no treatments have been shown to be effective yet for fibrillary glomerulonephritis. 40-50% of patients with fibrillary glomerulonephritis will progress to end stage renal disease within two to six years, depending on the severity. These patients will eventually require a kidney transplant and dialysis. The disease may return even after a kidney transplant, but it is usually less severe.
Introduction
Fibrillary glomerulonephritis and immunotactoid glomerulopathy, a similar but rarer condition, are two forms of nonamyloid fibrillary glomerular deposition diseases. Similar to amyloidosis, fibrils deposit in the wall of the glomerulus (in the basement membrane), but these fibrils are made from immunoglobulins rather than amyloid proteins. Under normal conditions, the glomerulus filters the blood to form urine and keeps the fibrils (which are important for cell structure). The word “fibrillary” refers to these protein fibers and “glomerulonephritis” refers to inflammation (“-itis”) of the kidney filters (“glomerulonephr-“). The buildup of these fibril proteins can activate the immune system and lead to inflammation and kidney damage. Scientists do not fully understand why these fibrils begin depositing in the glomerulus, but most suspect that certain underlying diseases play a role. Over time, the damaged glomeruli spill proteins into the urine and eventually lose their ability to filter blood altogether.

symptoms:
The most common symptoms of fibrillary glomerulonephritis include:
Blood in the urine (hematuria)Protein in the urine (proteinuria) causing it to look “foamy”Decreased kidney function (renal insufficiency)High blood pressure (hypertension)

