Filariasis

synonyms:
Bancroftian FilariasisFilarial ElephantiasisFilariasis MalayiMalayi Tropical EosinphiliaWuchereriasis

overview:
Filariasis is an infectious tropical disease caused by any one of several thread-like parasitic round worms. The two species of worms most often associated with this disease are Wuchereria bancrofti and Brugia malayi. The larval form of the parasite transmits the disease to humans by the bite of a mosquito. In the early stages of the infection, the patient characteristically complains of fever, chills, headaches and skin lesions. Any one of several antiparasitic agents may be effective in eliminating the worm. However, if the disease is left untreated, obstruction of the lymph flow will cause particular areas of the body especially the legs and external genitals, to swell profoundly. Symptoms are primarily a response to adult worms that cause inflammation. Chronic inflammation may progress to hardening of the lymphatic vessels (fibrosis) and obstruction of the lymph flow.

symptoms:
Some people with filariasis have no symptoms.  Other affected individuals may have episodes of acute inflammation of lymphatic vessels (lymphangitis) along with high temperatures, shaking chills, body aches, and swollen lymph nodes.  Excessive amounts of fluid may accumulate (edema) in the affected areas (i.e., arms and/or legs), but the accumulation typically resolves after the other symptoms are gone.  Attacks may also be accompanied by acute inflammation of the genitalia leading, in males, to inflammation, pain and swelling of the testes (orchitis), sperm track (funiculitis), and/or sperm ducts (epididymitis).  The scrotum may become abnormally swollen and painful.
Bancroftian filariasis affects both the legs and the genitals.  The Malayan variety affects the legs below the knees.
Some people with filariasis have abnormally high levels of certain white blood cells (eosinophilia) during acute episodes of symptoms.  When the inflammation resolves, these levels return to normal.
Filariasis may cause chronic lymph node swelling (lymphadenopathy) even in the absence of other symptoms.  Longstanding obstruction of the lymphatic vessels may lead to several other conditions.  These include accumulation of fluid in the scrotum (hydrocele), the presence of lymphatic fluid in the urine (chyluria), and/or abnormally enlarged lymphatic vessels (varices). Other symptoms may include progressive edema (elephantiasis) of the female external genitalia (vulva), breasts, and/or arms and legs.  Chronic edema may result in skin that is abnormally thick and has a “warty” appearance.

