Floating Harbor Syndrome

synonyms:
FHSPelletier-Leisti syndrome

overview:
Summary
Floating-Harbor syndrome (FHS) is an extremely rare genetic disorder characterized by a distinctive facial appearance, various skeletal malformations, delayed bone age, and expressive and receptive language delays. Children may be below average height for their age (short stature). Additional symptoms including mild to moderate intellectual disability have also been reported. The specific symptoms and severity FHS can vary greatly from one person to another. FHS is caused by mutations in the SRCAP gene. This mutation is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, although most cases of FHS occur randomly (sporadically) as the result of a new (de novo) mutation. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive.
Introduction
Floating-Harbor syndrome was named after the two hospitals where, during the 1970s, the first cases were identified and reported in the medical literature; namely, the Boston Floating Hospital and Harbor General Hospital in California.

symptoms:
Although researchers have been able to establish a clear syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about the disorder is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified cases, the lack of large clinical studies, and the possibility of other genes influencing the disorder prevent physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Parents should talk to their children’s physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
In some cases, delayed growth may occur before birth (prenatal growth retardation) resulting in low birth weight. Typically, growth deficiencies become apparent during the first year of life. Affected children may be below average height for their age (short stature), usually below the 5th percentile. The head size is typically in the average range. In addition to growth deficiencies, children with FHS have a delay in bone aging in the first decade of life, which means that the rate of growth and calcification of the bones is slower than normal.
Infants and children with FHS have distinctive facial features including a triangularly-shaped face; low-set ears; deep-set eyes with abnormally long eyelashes; thin lips; a broad, linear mouth; a prominent, triangular-shaped  nose that is narrow at the root and broadens at the base; the bottom of the sheet of cartilage and bone (nasal septum) that separates the right and left nostrils (columella) may be low-hanging; the nostrils are large; and the groove that runs from the nose to the upper lip (philtrum) is short. These facial characteristics are the most distinctive features of FHS. Although they may change as an affected individual ages, the key features remain constant.
Speech and language deficits are common in children with FHS. Expressive language deficits are most common and often most severely affected. Expressive language is the ability of a person to ‘output’ language or how people express themselves such as through speech or writing. It also encompasses the use of gestures and facial expressions. Some affected children also have receptive language deficits, in which they are unable to understand words and gestures. Affected individuals may have difficulty speaking (dysarthria) and exhibit a distinct, high-pitched nasally voice. In some cases, speech may be absent. Children may be described as having verbal dyspraxia, which refers to the difficulty or inability to coordinate the precise movements required to produce clear speech despite the absence of damage to the nerves or muscles. The severity of expressive and receptive language abnormalities can vary widely.
Intellectual disability that is typically mild to moderate in degree has been reported. Learning disabilities are common as well.
Affected individuals exhibit various skeletal malformations including short fingers and toes (brachydactyly); broad fingertips that give the appearance of clubbing; short, broad thumbs; and prominent joints. The pinkies may be fixed or ‘locked’ in a bent position (clinodactyly). Some individuals may have abnormalities of the collarbones (clavicles) including underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the collarbone or the development of a ‘false joint’ (pseudoarthrosis). A false joint is a bony structure that usually develops at the site of a poorly united fracture that allows abnormal movement of the affected bones.
Children with FHS may exhibit behavioral abnormalities including hyperactivity, impulsivity, short attention span, aggression, anxiousness, and obsessive behaviors such as repeated skin picking. Behavioral issues often improve in adulthood.
Additional symptoms have been reported in individuals with FHS including short bones in the hands (metacarpals); the presence of 11 pairs of ribs instead of 12; malformed (dysplastic) hips; abnormal curvature of the spine (kyphoscoliosis); seizures; backflow or leakage of the contents of the stomach into the esophagus (gastroesophageal reflux); farsightedness (hyperopia); crossed eyes (strabismus); recurrent middle ear infections (otitis media); and conductive hearing loss. Conductive hearing loss occurs when there is impaired transmission of sound from the outer or middle ear to the inner ear. Dental anomalies may also occur including extra (supernumerary) teeth, delayed loss of primary (“baby”) teeth, abnormally small teeth (microdontia), and malocclusion, a condition in which the upper teeth are improperly positioned in relation to the lower teeth.
In some cases, affected individuals may exhibit kidney abnormalities such as cysts on the kidneys or swelling (distention) of the kidneys due to the abnormal accumulation of urine (hydronephrosis). Hydronephrosis develops because of blockage within the urinary tract that prevents urine from being evacuated through the bladder. In some cases, there may be absence of the kidneys (agenesis).
In some cases, the onset of puberty may occur earlier than normal. Males may have undescended testicles (cryptorchidism) and hypospadias, a condition in which the tube that is connected to the bladder and discharges urine from the body (urethra) opens on the underside of the penis instead of the tip. Other conditions that have been reported in individuals with FHS include Celiac disease, congenital heart defects, mild underactivity of the thyroid (hypothyroidism), and, in adulthood, high blood pressure (hypertension).

