Focal Dermal Hypoplasia

synonyms:
combined mesoectodermal dysplasiaDHOFectodermal and mesodermal dysplasia, congenitalectodermal and mesodermal dysplasia with osseous involvementFDHfocal dermal dysplasia syndromefocal dermato-phalangeal dysplasiaFODHGoltz-Gorlin SyndromeGoltz Syndrome

overview:
Focal dermal hypoplasia (FDH), also known as Goltz syndrome, is a rare multisystem disorder that principally involves the development of the skin, hands and feet and eyes. It is a type of ectodermal dysplasia, a group of heritable disorders causing the hair, teeth, nails and glands to develop and function abnormally. Most of the cases of FDH (about 90 percent) are seen in females. This disorder is characterized by skin abnormalities that develop into streaks or lines of tumor-like lumps on various parts of the body. This syndrome displays a wide array of symptoms and may affect almost any organ. FDH is caused by changes (variants or mutations) or duplications/deletions in thePORCNgene.

symptoms:
An extremely wide range of symptoms characterizes FDH.
FDH is a rare disorder that primarily affects females and has extreme variability. It is characterized by skin lesions that look streaked, underdeveloped or “punched-out”, birth defects of the hands and feet and birth defects of the eyes. There may be inflammation, itching, reddening, blistering and crusting of the skin. Skin may be thinned, discolored or lack color (pigmentation) in some areas. The nails may be absent or appear abnormal. Enlargement of capillaries/veins under the skin (telangectasias) often develop with age. Wart-like growth (papillomas) are usually not present at birth but develop with age and are typically found on the gums, tongue, lips, nose, genetalia and anus. All individuals with focal dermal hypoplasia have at least a few of the skin abnormalities. The hair may be sparse, brittle and/or missing.
Eye differences are common and are present at birth and can include drooping eyelids (ptosis); clouding of the cornea; a cleft or keyhole-shaped defect in the iris or the retina (colobmas); small or missing eye (microphthalmia/anophthalmia); wide spacing between the eyes (hypertelorism); crossed eyes (strabismus) and/or exposure of the lining of the eyelid (ectropion).
Individuals with FDH may also have a variety of skeletal abnormalities, some of which may be present at birth. Curvature of the spine (scoliosis), fused vertebrae, underdeveloped or missing fingers or toes, extra fingers or toes (polydactyly), fingers or toes that have grown together (syndactyly), fingers that bend to the side (clinodactyly), permanently bent fingers (camptodactyly) and/or fusion of bones of the fingers and toes may be present. Other malformations of the skeleton may include a small skull, an underdeveloped jaw, a forward projection of the jaw, and/or uneven development of the face, limbs or trunk. Cleft lip and palate may be present and may cause feeding, breathing and vision problems.
Problems within the mouth are seen in more than 50 percent of patients affected. Failure of the teeth to develop properly often occurs in these patients. The teeth may be missing or underdeveloped and are unusually small or improperly spaced. Missing enamel may result in the development of cavities.
Abnormalities of the ears, the eyes, the heart, central nervous system, gastrointestinal system and the kidneys may also be present. Abnormalities within the gastrointestinal system may lead to problems with breathing and feeding. Intellectual disability can be found in some patients. Most patients with FDH are noted to be small at birth and have mild short stature.

