Follicular Lymphoma

overview:
Follicular lymphoma is a form of cancer. It is a type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), which is a group of related cancers that affect the lymphatic system (lymphomas). The lymphatic system functions as part of the immune system and helps to protect the body against infection and disease. It consists of a network of tubular channels (lymph vessels) that drain a thin watery fluid known as lymph from different areas of the body into the bloodstream. Lymph accumulates in the tiny spaces between tissue cells and contains proteins, fats, and certain white blood cells known as lymphocytes. As lymph moves through the lymphatic system, it is filtered by a network of small structures known as lymph nodes that help to remove microorganisms (e.g., viruses, bacteria, etc.) and other foreign bodies. Groups of lymph nodes are located throughout the body, including, but not limited to, the neck, under the arms (axillae), at the elbows, and in the chest, abdomen, and groin. Lymphocytes are stored within lymph nodes and may also be found in other lymphatic tissues. In addition to the lymph nodes, the lymphatic system includes the spleen, which filters worn-out red blood cells and produces lymphocytes, and bone marrow, which is the spongy tissue inside the cavities of bones that manufactures blood cells. Lymphatic tissue or circulating lymphocytes may also be located in other regions of the body. There are two main types of lymphocytes: B-lymphocytes (B-cells), which may produce specific antibodies to “neutralize” certain invading microorganisms, and T-lymphocytes (T-cells), which may directly destroy microorganisms or cancer cells, or assist in the activities of other lymphocytes.
Follicular lymphoma is a B-cell lymphoma. It is characterized by the transformation of a B-cell into a malignant (cancerous) cell. Abnormal, uncontrolled growth and multiplication (proliferation) of malignant B-cells can lead to enlargement of specific lymph node regions; involvement of other lymphatic tissues such as the spleen or bone marrow; and spread to other bodily tissues and organs. The term follicular lymphoma comes from the observation that the cancer cells are group in clusters (or follicles) within the lymph nodes.
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma including follicular lymphoma can be characterized as “low-grade” (or indolent), meaning the cancer tends to grow slowly and results in few associated symptoms or “high-grade” (aggressive), meaning the cancer typically grows rapidly.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms and physical findings of follicular lymphoma can vary from one person to another, depending upon the extent and region(s) of involvement and other factors. Follicular lymphoma is described as having a relapsing and remitting course; the cancer alternates between flaring up or worsening for a period of time often requiring treatment, and periods of time where the cancer is in remission or levels off. For many people, follicular lymphoma is a slow-growing cancer that develops over many years.
A common finding is the enlargement of affected lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy). Lymph nodes may become hard and can be felt (palpable) underneath the skin. Lymph nodes in the neck, the armpit (axilla), and groin are most commonly affected. Lymph nodes in the abdomen can also become enlarged, but cannot be felt. Lymph node enlargement is mostly painless. The enlargement of a lymph node may come and go for several years before a diagnosis of follicular lymphoma is made.
Follicular lymphoma can affect the bone marrow and the spleen, causing abnormal enlargement of the spleen (splenomegaly). When follicular lymphoma affects the bone marrow or the spleen, it can lead to low levels of the three main blood cell types: red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. This is called cytopenia. Red blood cells deliver oxygen to the body, white blood cells help in fighting off infections and platelets allow the body to form clots to stop bleeding. A low levels of red blood cells is called anemia and can be characterized by tiredness, shortness of breath, weakness, lightheadedness, headaches, and pale skin color. A low levels of white blood cells (neutropenia) increases the risk of contracting bacterial and fungal infections. A low levels of platelets (thrombocytopenia) makes the individual more susceptible to excessive bruising following minimal injury and spontaneous bleeding from the gums and nose.
Less often, affected individuals develop symptoms that are vague and can be nonspecific, which means that the symptoms are common to many different disorders or conditions. When dealing with lymphoma, these symptoms may come and go and are sometimes referred to as ‘B symptoms.’ These symptoms can include a persistent, chronic fever; unintended weight loss, and excessive sweating, especially at night (night sweats).
Follicular lymphoma affecting organs other than those in the lymphatic system or the bone morrow is rare. Sometimes, large tumors may form in the abdomen.
Transformed Follicular LymphomaThere is a risk in individuals with follicular lymphoma that the cancer can go under a transformation from a slow-growing (indolent) form into a more aggressive form called diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). As many as 30-40% of individuals may experience aggressive transformation of indolent follicular lymphoma. DLBCL can progress rapidly and spread to areas and organs outside of the lymphatic system (extranodal) and the bone marrow. ‘B’ symptoms are more common in transformed follicular lymphoma.
Primary Gastrointestinal Follicular LymphomaPrimary gastrointestinal follicular lymphoma often does not cause any apparent symptoms (asymptomatic). This form is generally considered to be a distinct variant of follicular lymphoma that has a better prognosis. Cancer often arises in the first section of the small intestines (duodenum), which connects to the stomach. Affected individuals can develop abdominal discomfort and heartburn. Less often, affected individuals can develop nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and intestinal bleeding, which can cause black, tarry stools.
Pediatric Follicular LymphomaPediatric follicular lymphoma is different from the adult form and is considered a distinct type of lymphoma by many researchers. Different genetic factors have been shown to play a role in the pediatric form than are seen in follicular lymphoma. Pediatric follicular lymphoma is characterized by the cancer remaining in the area where it first develops (localized presentation). Enlargement of the lymph nodes is the most common symptom. Overall, pediatric follicular lymphoma shows a generally benign behavior. The lymph nodes found in the neck (cervical area) and the tonsils are most often affected. The gastrointestinal tract, salivary duct, kidney, and skin can also be affected. Some researchers use the term pediatric-type follicular lymphoma because adults with this form of follicular lymphoma have been identified.

