Fragile X Syndrome

synonyms:
fragile site, folic acid type, rare, Fra(X)(Q27.3)marker X syndromeMartin-Bell syndrome

overview:
Fragile X syndrome is characterized by moderate intellectual disability in affected males and mild intellectual disability in affected females. Distinctive physical features are sometimes present in affected males including a large head, long face, prominent forehead and chin, protruding ears, loose joints and large testes, but these features develop over time and may not be obvious until puberty. Motor and language delays are usually present but also become more apparent over time. Behavioral abnormalities including autistic behaviors are common.
Fragile X syndrome has been found in all major ethnic groups and races, and is caused by an abnormality (mutation) in theFMR1gene.FMR1is a gene located on the X chromosome that produces a protein called FMRP needed for proper cell function. The syndrome became known as the fragile X syndrome because some individuals with the disorder were found to have a segment of their X chromosome that appeared to be broken or fragile (although not completely disconnected). Later it was learned that theFMR1gene is located precisely where the X chromosome appears to be “fragile” in affected individuals.
Chromosomes, which are present in the nucleus of human cells, carry the genetic information for each individual. Human body cells normally have 46 chromosomes. Pairs of human chromosomes are numbered from 1 through 22 and the sex chromosomes are designated X and Y. Males have one X and one Y chromosome and females have two X chromosomes. Each chromosome has a short arm designated “p” and a long arm designated “q”. Chromosomes are further sub-divided into many bands that are numbered. For example, “chromosome Xq27.3” refers to band 27.3 on the long arm of the X chromosome where theFMR1gene is located. The numbered bands specify the location of the thousands of genes that are present on each chromosome.
X-linked dominant disorders such as fragile X syndrome are caused by an abnormal gene located on the X chromosome. Females with the abnormal gene may be affected by this disorder. Males are usually more severely affected than females).
It is the absence or severe reduction of the protein made by theFMR1gene, FMRP, that causes fragile X syndrome. Mutation of theFMR1gene causes the loss or reduction of FMRP. Nearly all affected individuals have an instability within the gene leading to an increased number of copies of a portion of the gene called the CGG repeat region (also sometimes called “trinucleotide” or “triplet” repeat region). When greater than 200 repeats are present, abnormal chemical changes occur inFMR1called methylation. The expansion of the CGG repeat region to greater than 200 repeats accompanied by methylation of the gene, called a “full mutation”, causes the loss of FMRP leading to the fragile X syndrome. Fragile X syndrome occurs more often in males and results in more severe disorder in males.
Mutations inFMR1are unusual when compared to mutations found in other genes. Some individuals carry between 55 – 200 CGG repeats called a “premutation,” usually without having symptoms associated with fragile X syndrome. These individuals are at risk for having children or grandchildren with fragile X syndrome, however, and also at risk for two adult onset disorders, fragile X tremor-ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) and primary ovarian insufficiency (POI). The conditions have been termed FMR1-Related Disorders. (Please see the Causes and Related Disorders sections of this report for a more detailed explanation regarding premutations and brief summaries of theseFMR1-related disorders).

symptoms:
Fragile X syndrome is characterized by moderate intellectual disability in affected males and mild intellectual disability in affected females. The physical features in affected males are variable and may not be obvious until puberty. These symptoms can include a large head, long face, prominent forehead and chin, protruding ears, loose joints and large testes. Other symptoms can include flat feet, frequent ear infections, low muscle tone, a long narrow face, high arched palate, dental problems, crossed eyes (strabismus) and heart problems including mitral valve prolapse. Delayed motor development, hyperactivity, behavior problems, toe walking, and/or occasional seizures can also occur in some patients. Autistic behaviors such as poor eye contact, hand flapping, and/or self-stimulating behaviors are also common. Motor and language delays are usually present but become more apparent over time.

