Fraser Syndrome

synonyms:
cryptophthalmos-syndactyly syndromecryptophthalmos syndromecryptophthalmos with other malformationsFraser-Francois syndromeMeyer-Schwickerath syndromeUlrich-Feichtiger syndromeFS

overview:
Summary
Fraser syndrome (FS) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by several malformations that are present at birth. These include eyes that are completely covered by the skin and usually malformed (cryptophthalmos) causing blindness; fusion of the skin between the fingers and toes (cutaneous syndactyly), a blocked or missing anal opening (imperforate anus); limb anomalies; kidney (renal) abnormalities; external genital malformations; a narrow, blocked and malformed voice box and lower respiratory tract (nostrils, larynx and lungs); skeletal defects; umbilical hernia and intellectual disability. Infants and children with Fraser syndrome may also have additional abnormalities including malformations of the middle and outer ear that may result in hearing impairment. More recently, missing eyes (bilateral anophthalmia) and liver malformations (intrahepatic biliary atresia) have been found in children with FS. Fraser syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. There is currently no cure for FS but surgery is available to correct some malformations associated with this disorder, depending on the severity of the malformations. Fraser syndrome is named after the Canadian geneticist George R. Fraser who first described the syndrome in 1962.

symptoms:
Fraser syndrome is characterized by multiple physical abnormalities.
Failure of the eyelids to form properly (cryptophthalmos) is the most common abnormality, seen in 93% of affected individuals. Other less common forms of cryptophtalmos seen in these individuals are only one eye completely covered by skin, or one or both eyes partially covered. In addition, there are other possible malformations of the eyes such as small eyes (microphthalmia), missing eyes (anophthalmia), absent or malformed lacrimal tear ducts (nasolacriminal ducts) and increased distance between the eyes (hypertelorism). These eye abnormalities lead to vision loss or impairment.
Cutaneous syndactyly is another common abnormality in people with Fraser syndrome. Affected individuals typically have their three middle fingers joined and their three middle toes joined, but the other fingers/toes can also be joined.
Another common sign is kidney abnormalities such as the absence of one or both kidneys (unilateral or bilateral renal agenesis). Other kidney malformations may include improper development (dysplasia) and underdevelopment (hypoplasia).
Genital malformations are common in individuals with FS. In affected males, one or both testes may fail to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism), the urinary opening (meatus) may be abnormally placed on the underside of the penis (hypospadias), and/or the penis may be abnormally small (micropenis). Affected females may have malformed fallopian tubes, an abnormally enlarged clitoris (clitoromegaly), an abnormally shaped uterus with two horn-like extensions (bicornate uterus) and/or abnormally closed or absent vagina (vaginal atresia). Some affected individuals’ outer genitals may not have the typical appearance of either a male or female (ambiguous genitalia).
Respiratory tract abnormalities are another common sign in people with FS. There may be malformations of the voice box (larynx) (laryngeal stenosis or atresia), meaning it is more narrow than average or blocked. Malformations of the nose and lungs are also common. This can cause breathing difficulties leading to potentially fatal respiratory insufficiency.
Other possible signs and symptoms are:
Mouth: an opening or split in the roof of the mouth (cleft palate), difficulty in tongue movements, teeth overlapping because there is not enough space for all the teeth to properly fit within the mouth (dental crowding)Nose: a wide nose, flattening of the top part of the nose (depressed nasal bridge), deep indentations on the side of each nostril, abnormal narrowing of the posterior nasal aperture (choanal stenosis)Ears: malformations of ear structure, hearing impairment or lossEyes: absence of the eyeball (anophthalmia)Face: hair growth that extends from the forehead to the eyebrows, missing eyebrows and/or eyelashesBreast: widely spaced nipples (wide intermamillary distance)Cardiovascular: abnormal structure of the heart (abnormal heart morphology)Respiratory system: underdeveloped/small lung (pulmonary hypoplasia)Digestive system: abnormality of the small intestine, liver, abnormality of the anus, abnormality of the structure of the belly button (abnormal umbilicus morphology)Endocrine system: abnormality of the thymusImmune system: severe T-cell immunodeficiencySkeletal system: abnormality of the pubic bone (wide pubic symphysis) absent/underdeveloped sternum (aplasia/hypoplasia of the sternum)Nervous system: intellectual disability, small head size (microcephaly), incomplete formation of the bones of the spine (myelomeningocele)

