Froelich Syndrome

synonyms:
adiposogenital dystrophyBabinski-Froelich syndromedystrophia adiposogenitalisFrolich's syndromehypothalamic infantilism-obesityLaunois-Cleret syndrome

overview:
Froehlich syndrome, also known as adiposogenital dystrophy, is a group of endocrine abnormalities believed to result from damage to the hypothalamus, a part of the brain that links the nervous system to the endocrine system via the pituitary gland. The hypothalamus regulates sleep cycles and body temperature and composition while stimulating the pituitary gland to release a variety of hormones that control growth, metabolism and body development. Thus, numerous pituitary gland hormones could be indirectly disrupted by damage to the hypothalamus. Unlike similar diseases such as Prader-Willi syndrome, Froehlich syndrome is acquired, not inherited, and is associated with tumors of the hypothalamus area or their surgical treatment, causing increased appetite and reduced secretion of gonadotropin. This syndrome affects males more often than females.
The more obvious and frequently encountered characteristics include delayed onset of puberty, short stature, small testes and obesity. Teenage boys with this disorder must be distinguished from those who have inherited growth delay disorders or Prader-Willi syndrome.

symptoms:
Froehlich syndrome is characterized by increased or excessive eating that leads to obesity, small testes and a delay in the onset of puberty. It is also common for children with Froehlich syndrome to experience the delay in physical growth and the development of secondary sexual characteristics. In addition to delayed growth and puberty, children with this syndrome tend to be short in stature. As a result of tumor growth, some children with Froehlich syndrome may also develop intellectual difficulties, poor vision due optic nerve damage, lower than normal body temperature (hypothermia), very delicate skin and infundibulo-tuberal syndrome. The infundibulo-tuberal syndrome may result in small testes, obesity, diabetes insipidus and drowsiness (somnolence).

