Frontotemporal Degeneration

synonyms:
frontotemporal dementiafrontotemporal lobar degenerationFTDFTLDPick’s disease (limited, see below)

overview:
Summary
Frontotemporal degeneration is a group of varied disorders that are characterized by neurodegenerative changes that affect the brain. The clinical presentation of frontotemporal degeneration is diverse. Affected individuals can experience gradual changes in their behavior and personality, and may have difficulties in thinking and communicating effectively. The progression and the specific symptoms that develop can vary from one person to another. Generally, the clinical symptoms of these disorders can be broadly grouped into three categories which display changes in behavior, language and/or motor function. Frontotemporal degeneration is caused by progressive damage and loss of nerve cells in the frontal and temporal lobes of the brain. In most people, this is accompanied by   a buildup of one or the other of two proteins, tau or TDP-43. In FTD these proteins are misfolded (misshapen) which leads to their inappropriate buildup within brain cells and so interfering with or disrupting the normal function of these cells. The FTD clinical subtypes can also be classified as ‘tauopathies’ or TDP43-opathies, depending on which misfolded protein accumulates in the brain. In about 10% of cases, a third protein, FUS, accumulates instead of tau or TDP43. The accumulation of tau protein or TDP-43 protein can also be observed in other neurological disorders.
Although once used more broadly, the term Pick’s disease (after Dr. Arnold Pick, who first described it in 1892) is now reserved for a specific subtype of frontotemporal degeneration associated with a kind of abnormal tau protein known as 3R tau. In Pick’s disease, the clumps of 3R tau are found in distinctive round, silver-staining inclusions known as Pick bodies.
Introduction
There are many different terms and names that have been used to describe frontotemporal degeneration (FTD), also referred to as frontotemporal dementia. These names can be very confusing. Frontotemporal lobar degeneration is a general term that describes a group of disorders based on their neuropathology that cause damage and dysfunction of the frontal and temporal lobes of the brain. This is reflected in the spectrum of clinical subtypes listed above, which encompass behavioral, language and/or motor predominant decline in the ability to function normally. A clinical subtype refers to the symptoms that occur earliest and most prominently in a person.

symptoms:
Frontotemporal degeneration clinical subtypes are organized according to:1.progressive behavior/personality decline  – behavioral variant FTD (bvFTD), Pick’s disease2.progressive language decline – primary progressive aphasia (PPA), which comes in semantic, nonfluent-agrammatic, or logopenic variants (svPPA, naPPA, lvPPA)3.progressive motor function decline – progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), corticobasal syndrome, FTD with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FTD-ALS), FTD with motor neuron disease (FTD-MND)A person is classified into one of these three categories based on the signs and symptoms that first appear and appear most prominently. As the disorder progresses, individuals may begin to show signs and symptoms of other classifications, and their classifications may change.
It is difficult to predict the course of frontotemporal degeneration and the rate of disease progression can vary from one person to another. Ultimately, people with frontotemporal degeneration require fulltime caregiving and supervision.
Behavioral variant frontotemporal degeneration (bvFTD)The behavioral variant is the most common subtype and accounts for about 50% of people with frontotemporal degeneration. This subtype is characterized by changes in personality and behavior. Specific, early changes in behavior include disinhibition, loss of insight, apathy, loss of empathy, hyperorality, and dietary changes, and compulsive behaviors. Some individuals have a decreased sensitivity to pain. Memory is usually intact, but some individuals can display some memory loss. More commonly, people exhibit deficits in executive function such as decision making, good judgment, organizational skills, and attention.
Disinhibition is defined as a loss or lack of restraint toward socially accepted norms in behavior. For example, people displaying disinhibition may engage in inappropriate or impulsive behaviors like ignoring peoples’ personal space, touching or kissing strangers, making derogatory or offensive comments to people, reckless spending of money, theft, or public urination.
Apathy is defined as a general indifference or lack of interest in life, including to things or activities that were once considered exciting or emotionally moving. Apathy may lead people to show no concern for personal relationships or social interaction, work, hobbies, or personal hygiene. They may stare out a window for hours. Apathy is often mistaken for depression. Affected individuals also show little concern or sympathy for family members or friends and little responsiveness toward the social needs of family or friends as well.
Affected individuals may show dramatic changes in their diet and eating habits including binge eating, eating or drinking more sweets and alcohol than normal, and putting excessive amounts of food into their mouths. Some individuals crave and eat lots of carbohydrates. Sometimes, they may attempt to eat spoiled foods or inedible objects. The term hyperorality may be used to describe placing inappropriate objects into the mouth. Some people may increase tobacco use or begin to use tobacco for the first time in their lives.
Compulsive behaviors are best described as actions that a person consistently performs and repeats for no obvious reason (there is no reward and the person gets no pleasure from the act). Simple repetitive movements, continually repeating certain phrases or words, and complex ritualistic behaviors such as hoarding are examples of compulsive behaviors that can occur in individuals with behavioral variant frontotemporal degeneration.
Primary progressive aphasia (PPA)Primary progressive aphasia is characterized by changes in the ability to speak, write, read and understand language. Primary progressive aphasia is broken down into two main forms – the semantic variant and the nonfluent agrammatic variant. There is also a third form called the logopenic variant. Affected individuals have a slow, progressive loss of language skills. Aphasia, which is described as difficulties in understanding or expressing language, is the most common initial language deficit. Problems with language and loss of the ability to communicate impact a person’s day-to-day activities and living.
Semantic VariantThe semantic variant of PPA is characterized by problems remembering the correct word or failing to understand individual words, this is particularly true for words that are not used often by the person. Affected individuals may be unable to remember the names of familiar people, places or everyday objects (anomia).
Some individuals experience surface dyslexia or dysgraphia. Individuals with surface dyslexia have difficulty understanding written words. Individuals with dysgraphia may have difficulty writing words as well as problems with handwriting. They may have difficulty with words with irregular spellings such as yacht or colonel. These words may be mispronounced or misspelled.
Non-fluent Agrammatic VariantPeople with the non-fluent variant will have problems speaking with proper grammar (agrammatism). They may misuse words or leave out words such as words that connect nouns and words (e.g. to, from, the). They have difficulty finding the right word when speaking. Their speech may be stilted, which is described as slow, labored and hesitating. They often speak less than they used to. Affected individuals also have difficulty understanding complex sentences. Sometimes individuals with this variant can have difficulty writing certain words.
Logopenic VariantPeople with the logopenic variant have difficulties finding the right words when speaking. They will pause or hesitate frequently during speech because they must think to come up with the right word. Consequently, they have a slow rate of speech. They may have difficulties repeating short phrases or short sequences of numbers. They can understand words and sentences, even complex ones, early on but as the disease progresses may struggle to understand such information. Eventually, short term memory is affected and individuals may repeat themselves in conversation. Reading and writing ability is spared initially, but eventually problems develop with these forms of communication as well. Difficulty swallowing develops late in the course of the disease.
Frontotemporal degeneration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)Frontotemporal degeneration and the motor neuron disease ALS can occur in the same individual. ALS also known as Lou Gehrig’s disease in the US, is sometimes used interchangeably with the term motor neuron disease. Motor neuron disease is also used as a general term for a group of progressive neurological disorders in which there is a loss of nerve cells called motor neurons. These cells control voluntary muscle activity such as speaking, walking, and talking. Individuals may exhibit weakness, muscle loss (atrophy), tiny involuntary muscle twitches (fasciculation), difficulty speaking (dysarthria) and difficult swallowing (dysphagia). Involuntary control of muscle activity such as breathing and increased tightness and stiffness of muscles (spasticity) is also affected. When people have symptoms of frontotemporal degeneration and motor neuron disease, they may be described as having FTD associated with motor neuron disease (FTD-MND), or FTD associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FTD-ALS).
Progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal syndromeCorticobasal syndrome and progressive supranuclear palsy are rare movement disorders that are associated with the broad group of FTLD disorders. While a decline in motor function may be the earliest and most prominent clinical feature, these disorders can also demonstrate loss of language and behavioral or cognitive skills. Progressive supranuclear palsy causes difficulties with balance and walking resulting in frequent falls. Problems with eye movements are also seen particularly an inability to look down. Changes in behavior can also occur with time. Persons with corticobasal syndrome may have an inability to control movement, particularly with their hands and arms. Movement deficits may often appear only on one side, but eventually both sides are affected and difficulties with language can also occur.  NORD has individual reports on progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration. For more information, choose the specific disorder name as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.
Some affected individuals exhibit early-onset parkinsonism, which is the development of symptoms associated with Parkinson disease including abnormal slowness of movement (bradykinesia), resting tremor, and an inability to remain in a stable or balanced position (postural instability). Parkinsonism most often occurs in behavioral variant frontotemporal degeneration.

