Frontonasal Dysplasia

synonyms:
FNDmedian cleft face syndromeFrontorhinyFrontonasal malformation; FNM

overview:
Frontonasal dysplasia is a rare disorder characterized by abnormal development of the head and face before birth. Major physical characteristics may include widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); a flat broad nose; and/or a vertical groove down the middle of the face. The depth and width of the vertical groove may vary greatly. In some cases, the tip of the nose may be missing; in more severe cases, the nose may separate vertically into two parts. In addition, an abnormal skin-covered gap in the front of the head (anterior cranium occultum) may also be present in some cases. There are at least three types of frontonasal dysplasia that can be distinguished by genetic causes and symptoms.

symptoms:
Frontonasal dysplasia-1(FND-1)The physical characteristics associated with frontonasal dysplasia may vary greatly in severity from person to person. Features of this disorder include widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism) and/or a vertical groove down the middle of the face. The depth and width of the groove may vary greatly among affected infants. The nose may be unusually flat and broad, have a “notched” or missing tip, or, in severe cases, may be completely divided in two.
Other physical characteristics associated with frontonasal dysplasia may include a V-shaped hairline that extends down onto the forehead (widow’s peak), unusually small (slit-like) nostrils, an abnormal skin-covered gap in the front of the head (cranium bifidum occultum), and/or, in rare cases, a head that may appear abnormally short and wide (brachycephaly). Some infants with frontonasal dysplasia may also have incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate) and a vertical groove in the upper lip (cleft lip). The most severe clefts involve the lips, gums, and the bony front portion and/or soft back portions of the roof of the mouth (hard and soft palates). Less severe clefts may involve only one of these areas.
Frontonasal dysplasia-2 (FND-2)This form of fronotonasal dysplasia is characterized by a large skull defect and a premature fusion of the coronal suture (coronal craniosynostosis). Features of this disorder include widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism) and severely depressed nasal bridge and ridge. Affected individuals may experience broad variations in hair development ranging from rapid hair loss and the absence of hair, eyebrows, eyelashes and body hair (total alopecia) to either normal hair or unusual hair growth on the face (facial hipertrichosis). Males with this form often have genital abnormalities, such as absence of one or both testes from the scrotum (cryptorchidism). There is a partial or complete absence of the corpus callosum, which connects the two hemispheres of the brain (agenesis of the corpus callosum). Patients will have varying degrees of intellectual disability.
Frontonasal dysplasia-3 (FND-3)Features of frontonasal dysplasia-3 include missing eyes (anophthalmia) or very small eyes (microphthalmia), as well as low set ears that are rotated backwards. FND3 is often associated with the most severe abnormalities; however the characteristics and severity vary from person to person.
Rarely, infants with frontonasal dysplasia may also exhibit a form of cyanotic congenital heart disease (tetralogy of Fallot). The symptoms of tetralogy of Fallot include easy fatigability; rapid, shallow breathing; abnormal bluish coloration, especially of the lips and fingers; irregular heartbeats; and/or mild growth delays. (For more information on tetralogy of Fallot, see the Related Disorders section of this report.)
A subtype of frontonasal dysplasia called acromelic frontonasal dysplasia has been described in which central nervous system (CNS) and skeletal anomalies are combined with the craniofacial anomalies. The CNS anomalies include Dandy-Walker malformation. Dandy-Walker Malformation is characterized by absence (agenesis) of part of the brain (cerebellar vermis) and an abnormally large space at the back of the brain (cystic dilatation of the 4th ventricle). Other associated CNS anomalies are absence (agenesis) of the part of the brain that connects the two cerebral hemispheres (corpus callosum); protrusion of part of the brain and membranes that cover the brain (meninges) through an abnormal gap in the skull (encephalocele); abnormally wide ventricles in the brain that inhibit the flow of cerebral spinal fluid (hydrocephalus); protrusion of only the meninges through a defect in the skull (meningocele) and intellectual disability. The associated skeletal anomalies include an underdeveloped or absent tibia bone, extra toes (preaxial polydactyly of the feet), and clubfoot (talipes). Males affected with acromelic frontonasal dysplasia sometimes have undescended testes.

