Fructose Intolerance, Hereditary

synonyms:
Fructose-1-Phosphate Aldolase DeficiencyFructosemia

overview:
There are three inherited disorders of fructose metabolism that are recognized and characterized. Essential fructosuria, is a mild disorder not requiring treatment, while Hereditary fructose intolerance (HFI) and Hereditary fructose-1,6-biphosphatase deficiency (HFBP) are treatable and controllable but must be taken seriously.
Hereditary Fructose Intolerance (HFI) is an inherited inability to digest fructose (fruit sugar) or its precursors (sugar, sorbitol and brown sugar). This is due to a deficiency of activity of the enzyme fructose-1-phosphate aldolase, resulting in an accumulation of fructose-1-phosphate in the liver, kidney, and small intestine. Fructose is a naturally occurring sugar that is used as a sweetener in many foods, including many baby foods. This disorder can be life threatening in infants and ranges from mild to severe in older children and adults.
People who have HFI usually develop a strong dislike for sweets and fruit. After eating foods containing fructose, they may experience such symptoms as severe abdominal pain, vomiting, and low blood sugar (hypoglycemia).
Early diagnosis is important because, while most people who have HFI can lead normal lives if they adopt a fructose-free diet. If left untreated however, the condition can lead to permanent physical harm, including especially, serious liver and kidney damage.

symptoms:
Soon after fructose is added to the diet of an infant with HFI, symptoms become apparent.  These may include prolonged vomiting, failure to thrive, jaundice and growth retardation. There may be occasional episodes of unconsciousness.  Other symptoms include enlargement of the liver and frequently cirrhosis, and a tendency towards gastrointestinal bleeding because of deficiency of clotting factors. There are decreased levels of glucose and phosphate in the blood and increased levels of fructose in the blood and urine.
Patients with Hereditary Fructose Intolerance usually develop a strong dislike for sweets and fruit.  Although infants may exhibit growth delays and even experience malnutrition, there is no intellectual impairment.
It is very important to recognize the intolerance early to avoid damage to the liver, kidney, and small intestine.

