Fryns Syndrome

synonyms:
FRNS

overview:
Summary
Fryns syndrome is a rare genetic condition in which multiple abnormalities are present at birth. Characteristics of the syndrome are broadly categorized into diaphragmatic defects (diaphragmatic hernia) with incomplete development of the lungs, distinctive facial features, underdevelopment of the ends of the fingers and toes (distal digital hypoplasia), and other associated abnormalities of the brain, eyes, heart, gastrointestinal and genitourinary system. Fryns syndrome is thought to be inherited as an autosomal recessive condition, but the specific causal gene or genes have not yet been identified.
Introduction
Fryns syndrome was described for the first time in 1979, and about 50 patients have been reported in the medical literature since then. While originally thought to be a lethal disorder, there are few documented individuals that have survived into childhood, although survival beyond the neonatal period is extremely are. Since there is a wide variety of signs and symptoms, treatment and prognosis for the condition vary greatly from person to person.

symptoms:
Fryns syndrome is characterized by multiple congenital anomalies that vary in severity from person to person. Although not all patients present with the following characteristics, the most common clinical features in this condition are:
1.Diaphragmatic defects and pulmonary hypoplasia2.Distinctive facial appearance3.Distal digital hypoplasia4.Characteristic associated anomalies: excess amniotic fluid (polyhydramnios), cloudy corneas and/or abnormally small eyes (microphthalmia), orofacial clefting, brain malformation, cardiovascular malformation, gastrointestinal malformation, renal dysplasia/renal cortical cysts, genital malformation
1. More than 90% of individuals with Fryns syndrome have congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH): this means that the diaphragm is not completely formed, resulting in contents like the small intestine, liver, and stomach moving into the chest cavity. The most common hernia is a unilateral, left-sided hernia. Underdevelopment of the lung (lung hypoplasia) and other respiratory concerns are commonly associated.
2. Individuals with Fryns syndrome commonly have characteristic facial features such as coarse face, widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), and a cloudy outer layer of the eye (cloudy cornea), broad and flat nasal bridge with nostrils that face the top of the head (anteverted nares), malformed (dysplastic) and low-set ears, wide mouth (macrostomia), and small jaw (microretrognathia). Cleft palate, or incomplete closure of the two sides of the roof of the mouth, has been reported in 50% of individuals. Cleft lip was reported in 25% of patients.
3. Individuals with Fryns syndrome can have underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of nails and finger bones, reported in 60% of those affected. 10% of the patients have broad first digits, and bent fingers (camptodactyly). Side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis), extra ribs, abnormalities of development of bone and cartilage (osteochondrodysplasia) have also been described.
4. Other associated anomalies have been reported in some individuals with Fryns syndrome.
Neurological abnormalities due to structural brain malformations were found in the majority of affected children, with seizures presenting in at least one child. Examples of abnormalities are ventriculomegaly, failure of development (agenesis) of the corpus callosum, and Dandy-Walker malformation. Ventriculomegaly is the enlargement of the lateral ventricles of the brain, the cavities where cerebrospinal fluid flows. The corpus callosum connects the two halves of the brain with nerve fibers. In Dandy-Walker malformation, the fourth ventricle of the brain and the base of the skull (posterior fossa) are enlarged, and the cerebellar vermis, an area of the brain responsible for coordination of body arrangement, is underdeveloped. More information on these syndromes and how they can be diagnosed and treated may be found in the Rare Disease Database.
Cardiac defects are frequently observed, with 40% presenting with ventricular septal defect, 10% with atrial septal defects, and 10% with abnormalities of the aorta. Ventricular septal defects have an opening in the heart’s lower two chambers, while atrial septal defects are in the upper two chambers.
Due to the abnormality in the diaphragm in CDH patients, other abdominal defects sometimes occur. These can include omphalocele, where intestines, liver, and other organs develop outside of the abdominal wall, anal malformations, and intestinal malrotation, when intestines are twisted preventing passage of food.
About 10% of individuals with Fryns syndrome also present with genital and urinary abnormalities. Cysts in the kidneys (renal cysts) can be present, and the connected structure, the ureter, may be big or dilated (mega- or hydro-ureter) or have cysts. The kidney may not develop properly (renal dysplasia). Males can have one or both testes that have not descended in the scrotum (cryptorchidism) or have a small penis; sometimes the urethral opening is in an unusual position (hypospadias). Females may have an abnormal heart-shaped uterus that is split into two instead of one large cavity, called a bicornuate uterus.
Survival beyond the neonatal period is rare, and those who survive past this stage have documented developmental delays. The degree of developmental delay and intellectual disability varies from individual to individual. While previously it was thought that all individuals had severe developmental delay, a few children have been reported with milder learning disabilities. Growth has been reported to be normal in two children, but growth data for most individuals who survived past the neonatal period is not available.

