Functional Neurological Disorder

synonyms:
functional neurological symptom disorderfunctional movement disorderconversion disorderpsychogenic seizures / movement disorderdissociative seizures / motor disordernon-epileptic seizuresFNDdissociative neurological symptoms disorder

overview:
Functional neurological disorder (FND) is a medical condition in which there is a problem with the functioning of the nervous system and how the brain and body sends and/or receives signals, rather than a structural disease process such as multiple sclerosis or stroke. FND can encompass a wide variety of neurological symptoms, such as limb weakness or seizures.
FND is a condition at the interface between the specialties of neurology and psychiatry. Conventional tests such as MRI brain scans and EEGs are usually normal in patients with FND. This had led, historically, to the condition being relatively neglected by both clinicians and researchers. However, it is now established that FND is a common cause of disability and distress, which may overlap with other problems such as chronic pain and fatigue. Encouraging studies support the potential reversibility of FND with specifically tailored treatments. New scientific findings are influencing how patients are diagnosed and treated, which is creating an overall change in attitude towards people with FND.
Older ideas that FND is “all psychological” and therefore always associated with stress or past trauma, and that the diagnosis is made only when someone has normal tests, have changed since the mid-2000s. The new understanding, including modern neuroscientific studies, has shown that FND is not a diagnosis of exclusion. It has specific clinical features of its own and is a disorder of the nervous system functioning in which many perspectives are necessary. These vary a lot from person to person. In some people, psychological factors are important; in others, they are not.

symptoms:
FND patients can experience a wide range and combination of symptoms that are physical, sensory and/or cognitive. The most common include:
Motor dysfunction• Functional limb weakness/paralysis• Functional movement disorders including tremor, spasms (dystonia), jerky movements (myoclonus) and problems walking (gait disorder)• Functional speech symptoms including whispering speech (dysphonia), slurred or stuttering speech
Sensory dysfunction• Functional sensory disturbance includes altered sensation; e.g., numbness, tingling or pain in the face, torso or limbs; this often occurs on one side of the body• Functional visual symptoms including loss of vision or double vision
Episodes of altered awareness• Functional seizures (also called dissociative or non-epileptic) seizures, blackouts and faints: these symptoms can overlap and can look like epileptic seizures or faints (syncope)
DizzinessFunctional dizziness is often called persistent perceptual postural dizziness and has its own set of diagnostic criteria
Cognitive SymptomsFunctional cognitive symptoms include difficulties with memory, concentration or word finding difficulty where there are typical features consistent with an FND diagnosis
Symptoms often fluctuate and may vary from day to day or be present all the time. Some patients with FND may experience substantial or even complete remission followed by sudden relapses of symptoms.
Other physical and psychological symptoms are commonly experienced by patients with FND although they are not defined as part of the disorder. These include chronic pain, fatigue, sleep problems, bowel and bladder symptoms, anxiety, panic attacks and depression.

