Galactosemia

synonyms:
galactose-1-phosphate uridylyl transferase deficiencytransferase deficiency galactosemiaGALT deficiency

overview:
Galactosemia is a rare, hereditary disorder of carbohydrate metabolism that affects the body’s ability to convert galactose to glucose. Galactose is a sugar contained in milk, including human mother’s milk as well as other dairy products. It is also produced by the human body, and this is called endogenous galactose. Glucose is a different type of sugar. The disorder is caused by a deficiency of an enzyme galactose-1-phosphate uridylyl transferase (GALT) which is vital to this process. Early diagnosis and treatment with a lactose-restricted (dairy-free) diet is absolutely essential to avoid profound intellectual disability, liver failure and death in the newborn period. Galactosemia is inherited as an autosomal recessive genetic condition. Classic galactosemia and clinical variant galactosemia can both result in life-threatening health problems unless lactose is removed from the diet shortly after birth. A biochemical variant form of galactosemia termed Duarte is not thought to cause clinical disease due to lactose consumption.

symptoms:
An infant with galactosemia appears normal at birth, but within a few days or weeks loses their appetite and starts vomiting excessively. Yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes, and whites of the eyes (jaundice), enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly), appearance of amino acids and protein in the urine, growth failure, and, ultimately, accumulation of fluid in the abdominal cavity (ascites) with abdominal swelling (edema) may also occur. Diarrhea, irritability, lethargy and a bacterial infection may also be early signs of galactosemia. In time, wasting of body tissues, marked weakness, and extreme weight loss occur unless lactose is removed from the diet.
Children with galactosemia who have not received early treatment may show arrested physical and mental development and are particularly susceptible to cataracts in infancy or childhood. In severely affected children, overwhelming infection in the newborn period can cause life-threatening complications, but children with Duarte variant galactosemia may have few signs and no serious impairment(s).
In order to avoid the consequences of galactosemia, which may include liver failure and kidney dysfunction, brain damage and/or cataracts, infants must be treated promptly by removing lactose from the diet. Children treated with this special diet may still experience complications. Speech and learning difficulties and some behavioral problems are still likely to occur. Ovarian impairment is almost always seen in girls with classic galactosemia and is associated with an increase in the blood level of the gonadotropin hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH); males with galactosemia do not usually exhibit abnormalities in gonadal function.
The above-mentioned complications associated with classic galactosemia and clinical variant galactosemia have not occurred in individuals with Duarte variant galactosemia, a type of biochemical variant galactosemia. However, in a minority of these children, developmental delay and/or a speech abnormality has occurred, but it is unclear whether this is related to accumulation of galactose and its metabolites. Individuals with Duarte variant galactosemia do not need to maintain a special diet.

