Galloway-Mowat Syndrome

synonyms:
Galloway SyndromeHershberger SyndromeHiatal Hernia-Microcephaly-Nephrosis, Galloway TypeMicrocephaly-Hiatal Hernia-Nephrosis, Galloway TypeMicrocephaly-Hiatal Hernia-Nephrotic SyndromeNephrocerebellar SyndromeNephrosis-Microcephaly SyndromeNephrosis-Neuronal Dysmigration SyndromeYoder Dystonia

overview:
Galloway-Mowat syndrome is an extremely rare genetic disorder that is characterized by a variety of physical and developmental abnormalities, particularly neurological abnormalities and early onset progressive kidney disease. Physical features may include microcephaly, (a condition that indicates that the head circumference is significantly smaller than would be expected based upon an infant’s age and gender) and, in some cases, protrusion of part of the stomach through an abnormal opening in the diaphragm (hiatal hernia). Neurological abnormalities can include: various malformations of the brain, seizures, muscle spasms and abnormal movements (dystonia), diminished muscle tone throughout the body (generalized hypotonia), and visual impairment and abnormal eye movements (nystagmus). Infants and children exhibit a delay in obtaining developmental milestones. The majority of affected children do not obtain independent sitting or ambulation or the acquisition of any purposeful hand use or verbal communication. Severe/profound intellectual disability is typically present. Kidney disease is characterized by damage to the clusters of capillaries in the kidneys (focal glomerulosclerosis and/or diffuse mesangial sclerosis) resulting in loss of protein in the urine and abnormal kidney function with associated swelling of the face and peripheries resistant to current medical treatment (steroid resistant nephrotic syndrome). Most affected individuals do not survive beyond teenage years, with the commonest causes of death being nephrotic syndrome or seizures. Galloway-Mowat syndrome appears to be genetically heterogeneous and is believed to be inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, a significant proportion of cases identified to date have been shown to be caused by biallelic alterations (mutations) in theWDR73gene.
Introduction
Galloway-Mowat syndrome was first described in the medical literature in 1968 in two siblings who had microcephaly, hiatal hernia and kidney disease. Consequently, the disorder was also known as microcephaly-hiatal hernia-nephrotic syndrome. However, additional reports of this disorder have shown that affected individuals have neurological manifestations and kidney disease (nephrotic syndrome) as the main characteristics. Hiatal hernia is no longer considered a “key” feature of the disorder since it does not occur in many affected children.
In 2014, autosomal recessive loss of function mutations in theWDR73gene were found to account for a significant proportion of Galloway-Mowat syndrome cases.

symptoms:
Although researchers have been able to establish a syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about the disorder is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified cases, the lack of large clinical studies, and the possibility of other genetic causes aside fromWDR73and other yet undiscovered genetic factors influencing the disorder, have prevented physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Some researchers believe that Galloway-Mowat syndrome represents a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of disorders, which means disorders that have different underlying causes (e.g. different aberrant genes), but that result in the same symptoms or spectrum of symptoms. Consequently, the specific symptoms present and overall severity can vary greatly from one person to another.
It is important to note that affected individuals will not have all of the symptoms discussed below and every affected individual is unique. Galloway-Mowat syndrome can, in some instances, be associated with life-threatening complications very early in life. Parents should talk to the physician and medical team about their child’s specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
Physical features may include malformations of the head and facial (craniofacial) area including microcephaly, which can be present at birth or develop shortly after birth, an abnormally high, narrow forehead and unusually small jaw bones (micrognathia). The head may appear flat at the top (vertex) and back (occiput). Abnormalities affecting the eyes may also occur including optic atrophy, a condition characterized by degeneration of the optic nerve, which transmit information from the retina of the eye to the brain.
In some infants, part of the stomach may protrude through an abnormal opening where the esophagus passes through the diaphragm (hiatal hernia). As a result, the muscle that joins the esophagus and the stomach (esophagogastric junction) may not function appropriately, and there may be low pressure or inappropriate relaxation of the band of muscle fibers that closes the opening of the esophagus (lower esophageal sphincter). This allows the stomach’s acidic contents to flow back into the esophagus (gastroesophageal reflux). Such gastroesophageal reflux may cause affected infants to spit up and/or vomit repeatedly; in some cases, vomiting may be particularly forceful (projectile vomiting). Affected infants may fail to thrive due to the resulting loss of necessary calories and nutrients. Gastroesophageal reflux may also cause inflammation of the esophagus (esophagitis); choking; closure of the larynx due to sudden, violent laryngeal contractions (laryngospasm); an inflammatory condition of the lungs caused by the entrance of food particles into the respiratory passages (aspiration pneumonia); and/or additional respiratory complications.
Affected infants may also have kidney (renal) abnormalities that may be present at birth (congenital) or not develop until later in childhood. The kidney function becomes progressively impaired, and the kidneys excrete high levels of protein in to the urine (nephrotic syndrome), specifically, the protein albumin (albuminuria). This means that affected children have unusually low levels of albumin remaining in the blood (hypoalbuminemia); and exhibit anemia, weakness, an accumulation of fluid in the abdominal cavity (ascites), and/or an abnormal accumulation of fluid between layers of tissue under the skin (edema), particularly around the eye sockets (periorbital edema) and in the lowermost parts of the body, such as the ankles (dependent edema). The kidneys eventually lose their ability to excrete waste products through the urine, to regulate the balance of salt and water in the body, and to perform their other vital functions (renal failure). Affected individuals do not respond to the standard treatments for nephrotic syndrome and symptoms and disease progression worsen with intercurrent infections such as viral cold and flu.
Infants with Galloway-Mowat syndrome may also exhibit various malformations of the central nervous system. Neurological symptoms can precede the development of kidney abnormalities. Affected infants may have an abnormally small brain (microcephaly) at birth, or this can develop/progress as they get older. The cerebellum, which controls the coordination of movement, may be smaller than normal. The outer layer of the brain (cerebral cortex), which is responsible for conscious movement and thought, normally consists of several deep folds (gyri) and grooves (sulci). However, in some affected infants, the outer layer of the brain may have folds that are abnormally small (microgyria), or there may be a reduced number of folds that are larger than normal (pachygyria). In other cases, the folds may be absent (agyria) or incompletely formed (lissencephaly); as a result, the brain may have a smooth surface.
Neurological features may include a lack of response to stimuli in the environment and/or episodes of uncontrolled electrical disturbances in the brain that may cause convulsions, spasms, and/or other symptoms (seizures). Neuromuscular abnormalities may include diminished muscle tone throughout the body (generalized hypotonia); poor ability to control movements of the head; and/or an inability to control hand, feet, and/or eye movements, muscle spasms and abnormal movements of the limbs (dystonic and choreiform movements). Developmental abnormalities in affected infants and children may include an inability to perform certain movement (motor) skills normal for their age (e.g., sitting up, crawling, walking, and other developmental milestones) and a profound delay in the attainment of skills requiring the coordination of muscular and mental activity (psychomotor retardation). Severe intellectual disability is often present.
Additional symptoms and physical features have been described in specific cases including skeletal malformations such as underdeveloped nails, clubfeet, fingers that stuck or fixed in a bent position (camptodactyly), shortening of muscle tissue and tendons in a joint, forcing the joint into a flexed or bent position (flexion contractures), malformation of the central canal of the spinal cord, underdevelopment of the thyroid and/or adrenal glands, replacement of diaphragmatic muscle tissue with fibroelastic tissue that can cause displacement of the diaphragm (eventration of the diaphragm).  A brain malformation known as Dandy-Walker malformation (DWM) has been reported in a few specific cases.
Individuals with Galloway-Mowat syndrome as a result of mutations in the WDR73 gene appear to have a core set of features which include: progressive microcephaly, cerebellar atrophy (progressive shrinking of the cerebellum), generalized hypotonia, severe/profound psychomotor impairment and intellectual disability and progressive nephrotic syndrome. Seizures of different types that are difficult to control and dystonia and choreiform movements have been frequently observed.

