Gastroparesis

synonyms:
delayed gastric emptyinggastric atonygastric dysmotilitygastric stasisgastrointestinal autonomic neuropathygastroparesis diabeticorumgastropathysevere functional dyspepsia

overview:
Gastroparesis (abbreviated as GP) represents a clinical syndrome characterized by sluggish emptying of solid food (and more rarely, liquid nutrients) from the stomach, which causes persistent digestive symptoms especially nausea and primarily affects young to middle-aged women, but is also known to affect younger children and males. Diagnosis is made based upon a radiographic gastric emptying test. Diabetics and those acquiring gastroparesis for unknown (or, idiopathic) causes represent the two largest groups of gastroparetic patients; however, numerous etiologies (both rare and common) can lead to a gastroparesis syndrome.
Gastroparesis is also known as delayed gastric emptying and is an old term that does not adequately describe all the motor impairments that may occur within the gastroparetic stomach. Furthermore, there is no expert agreement on the use of the term, gastroparesis. Some specialists will reserve the term, gastroparesis, for grossly impaired emptying of the stomach while retaining the label of delayed gastric emptying, or functional dyspepsia (non-ulcer dyspepsia), for less pronounced evidence of impaired emptying. These terms are all very subjective. There is no scientific basis by which to separate functional dyspepsia from classical gastroparesis except by symptom intensity. In both conditions, there is significant overlap in treatment, symptomatology and underlying physiological disturbances of stomach function.
For the most part, the finding of delayed emptying (gastric stasis) provides a “marker” for a gastric motility problem. Regardless, the symptoms generated by the stomach dysmotility greatly impair quality of life for the vast majority of patients and disable about 1 in 10 patients with the condition.
While delayed emptying of the stomach is the clinical feature of gastroparesis, the relationship between the degree of delay in emptying and the intensity of digestive symptoms does not always match. For instance, some diabetics may exhibit pronounced gastric stasis yet suffer very little from the classical gastroparetic symptoms of: nausea, vomiting, reflux, abdominal pain, bloating, fullness, and loss of appetite. Rather, erratic blood-glucose control and life-threatening hypoglycemic episodes may be the only indication of diabetic gastroparesis. In another subset of patients (diabetic and non-diabetic) who suffer from disabling nausea that is to the degree that their ability to eat, sleep or carry out activities of daily living is disrupted gastric emptying may be normal, near normal, or intermittently delayed. In such cases, a gastric neuro-electrical dysfunction, or gastric dysrhythmia (commonly found associated with gastroparesis syndrome), may be at fault.
Therefore, these disorders of functional dyspepsia, gastric dysrhythms, and gastroparesis are all descriptive labels sharing similar symptoms and perhaps representing a similar entity of disordered gastric neuromuscular function. For this reason, a more encompassing term, gastropathy, can be used interchangeably with gastroparesis.

symptoms:
The digestive symptom profile of nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, reflux, bloating, a feeling of fullness after a few bites of food (early satiety), and anorexia can vary in patients both in combination and severity. A small percentage of patients who live with poorly managed symptoms despite numerous treatment interventions, and an inability to meet their nutritional needs represent the extreme end of the gastroparesis spectrum of gastric failure. For most, the prevailing symptom experience is persistent nausea that often intensifies a few hours after eating. Nausea may become so intense as to trigger vomiting even after a few sips of water. Vomiting, also commonly reported, typically starts a couple of hours after eating so that the food is still recognizable and undigested. Chronic abdominal pain, which may also occur, is felt to result from visceral neuropathy. The pain, often diffuse, is described as burning, shearing or gnawing in character. The nature of pain may also be complex with some individuals experiencing acute pain, trigged by eating, layered on top of the chronic pain. This acute, sharp pain may be related to intestinal cramping and/or to spasms in the upper portion of the stomach caused by its failure to relax and “accommodate” the just-eaten food. As well, a gall bladder that is sluggish to empty (paresis) is commonly found in association with a poorly emptying stomach. This may all add to the pain experienced soon after eating. A poorly emptying stomach additionally predisposes patients to regurgitation of solid food, as well as gastric esophageal reflux disease (GERD). The reflux may range from mild through to severe. GERD complications can create esophageal spasm (also called non-cardiac chest pain) and can add to the burden of chronic pain. In severe cases, reflux aspiration pneumonitis compounds the clinical picture.
Other symptoms include belching and bloating-again, developing soon after meal ingestion and lasting for hours-along with visible abdominal distention. The distention and bloating may push up against the diaphragm making breathing uncomfortable. Loss of appetite (anorexia), a conscious avoidance of food in an attempt to moderate digestive symptoms, or food craving that are all frequently reported as well.
Vomiting, which can result in the life-threatening conditions of dehydration and electrolyte imbalances, represents the most troubling of all the digestive symptoms related to gastroparesis. Repeated vomiting usually necessitates a visit to the emergency room. Concomitant spiraling malnourishment accompanies frequent, chronic vomiting and precipitates repeated and prolonged hospital admissions. Approximately 5 to 10% of insulin-dependent diabetics may progress to severe symptomatic gastroparesis.
In the majority of insulin-dependent diabetics, gastroparesis is often overlooked and under-diagnosed, especially in its early stages. The characteristics of poor glucose control and acid reflux are often the only signatures of delayed gastric emptying. The typical picture seen in the diabetic gastroparetic stomach is low blood-glucose levels at bedtime with very high blood-glucose levels by the next morning. This situation is interspersed with days of good blood-sugar control. Some scientific studies have found diabetic gastroparesis to correlate with autonomic neuropathy (diabetic autonomic neuropathy, or DAN and cardiac autonomic neuropathy, or CAN), but not with the duration of diabetes, metabolic control or other chronic complications. It is to be noted that acute hyperglycemia profoundly retards gastric emptying.
If DAN is present, then regaining control of blood glucose can be enormously challenging. For Type 2 diabetics (non-insulin dependent), absorption of oral hypoglycemic agents may be very unpredictable due to the delayed gastric emptying.
Gastroparetic symptoms in most patients show either a pattern of cycling with flare-ups, or daily occurrences persisting for years.

