Gastroschisis

synonyms:
congenital fissurelaparoschisis

overview:
Summary
Gastroschisis is a rare defect apparent at birth in which the intestines prolapse through the right side of the umbilical ring with an intact umbilical cord on the left side. Based on human evidence, gastroschisis likely occurs because of an amnio-ectodermal separation at the pars flaccida (i.e., thinner right side of the rudimentary umbilical ring) or an amniotic rupture. These findings suggest that gastroschisis is more likely a disruption rather than a structural malformation. Gastroschisis can be detected by a routine prenatal ultrasound during a mother’s pregnancy, usually around 18-20 weeks gestation. While the cause(s) is(are) unknown, gastroschisis may result from multiple maternal genes interacting with environmental factors. Treatment is a surgery that slowly returns the intestines to the abdomen (silo repair).

Introduction
The name gastroschisis is derived from two words. Gastro meaning related to the stomach. Schisis, is a Greek term, meaning separation. Translating gastroschisis would suggest the separation of the stomach, but in reality, it is not the stomach that separates but likely the amnio-ectodermal connection or an amniotic rupture at the right edge of the umbilical ring.

symptoms:
Gastroschisis is apparent at birth and can also be detected prenatally with ultrasound. Infants with this disorder have a 2-5 cm opening at the umbilical ring in which prolapsed abdominal organs appear on the outer surface of the abdomen. The abdominal cavity is smaller than normal, and the prolapsed intestines and other organs have no membranous sac covering it. This opening is typically found to the right, adjacent to the umbilical cord attached on the left side. The stomach, small intestine and large intestine are the most common organs that extend outside the abdomen. If the liver is also prolapsed, this should not be considered a gastroschisis.
The intestines may look swollen, inflamed, thickened, short and covered with a thick fibrous peel due to exposure to the liquid that surrounds the fetus during pregnancy (amniotic fluid). Twisting (malrotation) of the bowel is always present and the exposed bowel is at risk for obstruction leading to deterioration of the intestines and interruption of the blood supply due to the small size of the defect.
Bowel function is delayed in most infants due to malabsorption and deficient movement (hypomotility). Absence or closure (atresia) of intestines and other gastrointestinal tract abnormalities occur in as many as 10% of infants with gastroschisis.
Other medically related issues with this disorder may be infection, dehydration and dangerously low body temperature (hypothermia).
Some children with gastroschisis may have other health problems such as shorter intestines, slow growth before birth, prematurity or heart abnormalities.

