Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors

synonyms:
GIST

overview:
Summary
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are in a group of cancers known as sarcomas. The number of new cases in the United States each year has been estimated at 5,000–6,000. These tumors arise from nerve cells in the wall of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and can occur anywhere from the esophagus to the rectum. However, most arise in the stomach (55%) and the small intestine (29%), while the colon/rectum (3%) and esophagus (0.5%) are less common sites of the disease. There have also been rare reports of tumors arising in the appendix, pancreas, gallbladder and lining of the abdominal cavity.
These tumors most commonly present with non-specific symptoms, including feeling full sooner than normal after eating (early satiety) and abdominal pain, but may also present with bleeding or signs of intestinal obstruction. They spread most commonly to sites within the abdominal cavity and to the liver, although certain subtypes spread to lymph nodes and very rare cases spread to the lungs and bone. Although it was previously believed that some cases of GIST are benign (do not spread), it is now understood that all GISTs have some potential to metastasize, with risk ranging from very low to high. A better understanding of GIST biology has also revealed that its prevalence varies across racial and ethnic groups.
Most GISTs result from a non-inherited change (variant) in one of two genes,KITorPDGFRA, which leads to inappropriate and ongoing division of tumor cells. However, approximately 10%–15% of cases of GIST in adults and 85% of cases in children are not associated with variants in either theKITorPDGFRAgenes. These previously uncategorized cases were originally grouped under the umbrella terms “wild-type GIST” and “pediatric-like GIST.” Advances in research have since revealed that these tumors have variants in as many as 20 other genes, and defining the specific variants in individual patients can help guide further research and treatment.
Most GIST-causing variants arise randomly and are not inherited. However, there are rare cases in which a gene variant is inherited, for example in succinate dehydrogenase (SDH)-deficient GIST associated with Carney–Stratakis syndrome (CSS; also known as GIST-paraganglioma syndrome). Though most GIST arise in older adults, these rarer cases of inherited GIST often present in children, adolescents and young adults.
GIST is most commonly diagnosed by pathological analysis of biopsy tissue taken during an endoscopy or through the skin. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging are also used to diagnose GIST and determine the location and extent of the tumor. Molecular characterization of the tumor, through identification of specific gene variants or the presence of markers on the tumor surface, provides further information for diagnosis and can help guide treatment.
Surgical removal is the most common treatment for GIST that has not spread, and an operation provides the best chance of a cure if the tumor is completely removed. In cases where the tumor has spread, oral chemotherapy (i.e., pills) is usually indicated in conjunction with surgery. The most frequently used drugs are tyrosine kinase inhibitors (e.g., Gleevec), which target the commonly observed variants inKITandPDFGRA. Patients respond differently to the range of available tyrosine kinase inhibitors, so it can be useful to test for specific variants in the tumor when selecting a course of therapy. Clinical trials are also underway to target subtypes of GIST with rare genetic variants. Finally, it is noteworthy that there is no role for radiation therapy in the management of GIST.
Introduction
GISTs belong to the group of cancers called sarcomas, which are malignant tumors that arise from various tissues, including fat, muscle, nerves, cartilage, bone, blood vessels and lymphatic vessels. This distinguishes sarcomas from carcinomas, which arise from the lining of organs/tissues (e.g., lung, colon, breast, prostate and pancreas), lymphomas, which arise from immune cells in lymph nodes and leukemias, which arise from immune cells in the bone marrow.
Until the late 1990s, the diagnosis of GIST did not exist. We now know that GISTs are the most common sarcomas and that these tumors arise from the interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC), pacemaker cells in the wall of the bowel that regulate the muscular contractions that help propel food through the digestive system (peristalsis). Recently, cells called telocytes have been suggested as an additional source of some GISTs. Overall, GISTs are molecularly heterogeneous, with their genetic variants linked to tumor location, prognosis and pattern of spread, as well as drug sensitivity and resistance.

symptoms:
GIST can present with a wide spectrum of subjective symptoms, such as nausea, early satiety, bloating and weight loss. Patients can also experience objective signs of a tumor, such as anemia (low red blood cell count) or a lump in the abdomen. These signs and symptoms depend on the tumor location (e.g., stomach versus rectum), size and pattern of growth.
The most common site of origin is in the stomach (~55%), and these tumors are often associated with pain, GI bleeding and/or a mass that can be seen or felt (palpable). Other primary sites are the small intestine (~29%), the colon and rectum (~3%) and the esophagus (~0.5%). Rarely, cases of so-called extra-intestinal GIST (E-GIST) have been reported to occur outside the bowel, along the lining of the abdomen or within the abdominal fat. Tumors present visually as discrete masses. GI bleeding can lead to anemia, which can cause paleness, lightheadedness, fatigue and other symptoms. Patients presenting with tumors of these sites may also experience weight loss, fever, abscess and/or urinary symptoms. There are rare cases presenting in the lowest third of the esophagus, which can cause difficulty with swallowing and resultant weight loss.
The primary site of the tumor may affect prognosis, with small intestinal GIST having a poorer survival rate than that originating in the stomach (though this notion has been questioned in recent studies). In addition, intestinal location has been correlated with a high risk of spread (metastases). Approximately 75%–90% of GISTs are limited to one site upon diagnosis. GIST spreads most commonly to sites within the abdominal cavity and to the liver, although there are rare cases that have spread to the lungs and bone. GIST rarely spreads to the lymph nodes. Although some cases of GIST were previously thought to be benign, it is now known that all GISTs have the potential to spread. This risk is dependent on the tumor location and size, as well as the number of cells that are dividing (i.e., mitotic index), as counted by a pathologist using a microscope.
GIST in children and adolescentsGIST is extremely rare in children and adolescents, and the symptoms and pathology in these age groups are different from those in most adults. These cases generally present in the stomach, are more likely to show lymph node involvement and are more likely to spread to the liver and abdominal lining. They are usually not associated with theKITorPDGFRAgene variants found in most adults, and about 80% of these cases have a variant in the gene for the succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) enzyme complex. Patients with these SDH-deficient tumors most often have an accompanying diagnosis of hormone-secreting paraganglioma in a condition known as Carney–Stratakis syndrome (CSS). Thus, patients should be screened for neck and chest paragangliomas, and also assessed for the presence of specific hormone metabolites in urine (catecholamines and metanephrines). It was previously believed that age was a determining factor in the differences between cases of GIST affecting adults versus children, and cases in children were distinguished as “pediatric-type” GIST or “wild-type” GIST. However, some adult cases of GIST share the distinct characteristics found in most pediatric cases, rendering the separation of these cases based on age unwarranted and somewhat of a misnomer. It is now best to discuss GIST subtypes based upon the specific characteristics of the tumor.

