General Myoclonus

synonyms:
No synonyms found

overview:
Myoclonus is the term used to describe the sudden, involuntary jerking of a muscle or group of muscles caused by muscle contractions (positive myoclonus) or muscle relaxation (negative myoclonus). The twitching or jerking of muscles cannot be controlled by the person experiencing it. Myoclonic jerks may occur infrequently or many times a minute. They sometimes occur in response to an external event or when a person attempts to make a movement. By itself, myoclonus may be seen as a symptom rather than a disease. To some degree, it may occur occasionally to otherwise healthy people. (For instance, hiccups may be considered a type of myoclonus.) In severe cases, it can interfere with movement control and balance, and limit various everyday activities such as eating or talking.

symptoms:
There are different forms of myoclonus and they are classified in different ways. One way of classifying the different forms is by their cause. Some of the types of myoclonus are:
Physiologic myoclonusThis occurs in neurologically normal people. The occurrence of myoclonus during sleep and sleep transitions is the most common example.
Essential myoclonusIn this type, the myoclonic jerks or twitches are usually the most prominent or only clinical finding. This type of myoclonus usually progresses slowly or not at all. There are hereditary (autosomal dominant) and non-inherited, random (sporadic) forms.
Progressive myoclonus epilepsy (PME)This is a group of diseases characterized by myoclonus, epilepsy, and other symptoms such as trouble walking or speaking. These disorders tend to get worse over time (progressive).
Sleep myoclonusThis typically occurs just at the moment of dropping off to sleep. In some cases, the affected individual does not find it particularly troublesome. In other cases, it may interfere with the sleep process. Myoclonus may be a symptom in certain sleep disorders such as restless legs syndrome.
Symptomatic (secondary) myoclonusThis is the most common category and usually is found in the setting of an identifiable underlying disorder. Myoclonus may not be the most prominent clinical symptom. Common co-existing problems include ataxia, dementia, and Parkinsonism. Myoclonus may also be a symptom associated with infections, non-neurologic medical illnesses, toxic-metabolic states, and storage diseases.

