Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy

synonyms:
ENPP1 deficiencyABCC6 deficiencyidiopathic infantile arterial calcification (IIAC)idiopathic arterial calcification of infancy (IACI)arterial calcification of infancyocclusive infantile arterial calcificationocclusive infantile arteriopathyGACI

overview:
Summary
Generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) is a rare genetic disorder that affects the circulatory system in addition to other body systems. It occurs in approximately 1:200,000 pregnancies. GACI affects males and females equally and occurs in populations all around the world. It has an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern and usually affects infants during the first 6 months of life. There have been slightly over 200 cases documented since GACI was first described in medical literature in 1899.
Symptoms of GACI include respiratory distress, arterial calcification, gastrointestinal issues, joint calcification, hearing loss, high blood pressure, stroke, reduced or absent pulses, and heart failure. GACI manifests itself differently even within families with the same genetic cause of the disease. No two people with GACI will have identical medical characteristics.
GACI type 1 occurs in 75% of patients, is caused by variants in theENPP1gene, and is also called ENPP1 deficiency. Patients with ENPP1 deficiency are at risk of developing autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets type 2 (ARHR2). ARHR2 can cause bone pain, bone deformities (knocked knees, bowed legs), dental problems, calcification of ligaments and short stature. With proper treatment the bones can be strengthened, and side effects minimized.
GACI type 2 occurs in 10% of patients, is caused by variants in theABCC6gene, and is also called ABCC6 deficiency. As they get older, patients with ABCC6 deficiency are at risk of developing characteristics similar to pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), involving the elastic tissue of the skin, the eye, cardiovascular and gastrointestinal systems.
Sometimes individuals affected with GACI do not have variants in theENPP1orABCC6genes, and in those cases the cause of the disorder is unknown.
Currently, there is no curative treatment for GACI and survival rates vary greatly. Treatment with bisphosphonates might lead to increased survival rates. Spontaneous regression of arterial calcifications can occur, and antihypertensive treatment can be tapered off gradually.

symptoms:
Newborns with GACI may exhibit symptoms such as difficulty breathing, reduced or absent pulses, cardiomyopathy, cardiomegaly or accumulation of fluid in the extremities (edema). They may struggle with heart failure or high blood pressure (hypertension). Newborns with GACI may also present with feeding difficulties, irritability or failure to thrive. On ultrasound or echocardiograph, the condition is characterized by calcification of the arteries or the valves of the heart accompanied by thickening of the lining of the arteries (intima).
Calcification in blood vessels may cause arterial stiffness/hardening, therefore making pulses faint or absent altogether.
Infants with GACI may suffer from gastrointestinal complications such as inflammation of the wall of the small intestine or obstruction due to stenosis. Infants with gastrointestinal complications may present with irritability and/or bloody stool. The gastrointestinal complications tend to go away as the child grows.
In nearly 50% of cases, babies are diagnosed soon after birth due to these symptoms. In other babies, GACI is recognized later, usually around 1-6 months of age after gradual or persisting symptoms.
Joint calcifications are seen in roughly 30% of babies with GACI. These calcifications are frequently seen in the hip, ankle, wrist, shoulder, elbow, knee, foot and sternoclavicular (SC) joint.
Many patients with GACI type 1 go on to develop a rare form of rickets known as autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets type 2 (ARHR2). This can result in bone and joint pain, bone deformities, calcification of ligaments and short stature.
Individuals with GACI are at risk for developing hearing loss. The hearing loss can be conductive, sensorineural, or mixed and can present as early as infancy. The hearing loss might be caused by calcification of the arteries supplying the inner ear, immobility of the ear bone (stapedovestibular ankylosis) and/or abnormal remodeling of small bones (ossicles) in the middle ear.
Older patients with GACI may go on to develop symptoms of pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE). PXE is a disorder that causes select elastic tissue in the body to become mineralized due to calcium and other minerals being deposited in the tissue. This can result in changes in the skin and eyes. The changes to the skin frequently present on the neck, underarms, inside of the elbows, the groin and behind the knees. It may resemble a rash or have a cobblestone appearance. Another complication is the possible development of angioid streaks in the eye. Angioid streaks are small breaks in Bruch’s membrane, an elastic tissue between the retina and underlying blood vessels, that may become calcified and crack.
Patients with GACI frequently present with dental issues such as teeth that don’t fully erupt (infraocclusion), over-retained primary teeth, ankylosis, slow orthodontic movement and excessive build-up of normal cementum on the roots of the teeth.

