Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker Disease

synonyms:
Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker (GSS) syndromeGSS

overview:
Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker (GSS) disease is a rare genetic degenerative brain disorder. The symptoms, the progression of the disorder, and the overall severity can vary greatly among affected families and individuals. This is true even among members of the same family. A common symptom is a progressive loss of coordination that may present as unsteadiness of gait, difficulty walking, and clumsiness. As the disease progresses, other symptoms become apparent including dementia, in which there are worsening problems with thought, cognition, memory, language, and behavior. In all instances, GSS is caused by an abnormal variant of the prion protein (PRPN) gene. ThePRNPgene encodes the human prion protein (PrPc). Alterations in this gene lead to the generation of abnormally-shaped (misfolded) prion protein (PrPSc), also known simply as a “prion”, which is toxic to the body. In GSS, the abnormal prions build up primarily within the brain. This leads to the progressive loss of nerve cells (neurons) and the various symptoms associated with this disorder. The disorder most often affects people in their 40s through 50s. There is no cure, but investigators are researching ways to best treat and manage GSS.

Introduction

GSS is classified as a transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE) or a prion disease. Prion diseases are caused by the accumulation of misfolded prion protein in the brain. Two other prion diseases, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) and fatal familial insomnia (FFI), may also occur as a result of variations of thePRNPgene, although some prion diseases occur in the absence of a genetic variation. Generally, prion disorders are characterized by long incubation periods and short clinical duration, which means the abnormal prions may be build up for many years (long incubation period), but once symptoms begin the disorder rapidly worsens.

symptoms:
The initial symptoms associated with Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker disease are progressive loss of coordination and mild difficulty with speech (dysarthria). Loss of coordination may present as unsteadiness, difficulty walking, and clumsiness. Affected may have problems coordinating voluntary movements (ataxia). Speech problems may present as slurred speech and progress to severe dysarthria in which people have difficulty speaking and other people have difficulties understanding what they are trying to say. There may be problems with swallowing (dysphagia) due to lack of coordination of the muscles needed for swallowing.
Additional early signs include diminished reflexes (hyporeflexia), progressive weakness in the legs, and a sensation of burning, tingling or discomfort under the skin (dysesthesia). As the disorder progresses, affected individuals develop a condition called spasticity. Spasticity is characterized by rigid muscle tone and progressive muscle stiffness and weakness, causing abnormal, writhing movements, abnormal slowness of movement (bradykinesia). Some affected individuals exhibit a reduced degree of facial expression called hypomimia or masked facies. Hypomimia means that affected individuals are often do not show much expression or emotion.
Some affected individuals develop rapid, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus) and have difficulties judging distance or scale (ocular dysmetria), and problems with vision. Sometimes, eye problems can progress to blindness. Less commonly, hearing loss or deafness will develop.
Additional symptoms that sometimes occur include seizures, paralysis (palsy) of certain cranial nerves, and movements disorders like jerky, muscle spasms (myoclonus) or slow, writhing, involuntary movements (athetosis).
Eventually, affected individual develop problems with cognition, which is thinking, remembering, reasoning, imagining and processing thoughts. Concentration and focus are particularly affected, and some individuals exhibit slowness of thought processing (bradyphrenia). As the disease progresses, other symptoms become apparent including dementia, in which there are worsening problems with thought, cognition, memory, language, and behavior. Initially, the signs may be subtle and include unintended weight loss, forgetfulness, inattentiveness, problems concentrating, or speech problems. Episodes of confusion or hallucinations can eventually occur.
GSS causes slowly progressive physical and mental deterioration, although more rapid progression can occur. Eventually, affected individuals become bedridden, unable to eat unassisted, and unable to communicate. The disease ultimately progresses to coma and death.

