Gestational Trophoblastic Disease

synonyms:
GTDgestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN)malignant gestational trophoblastic diseasepersistent gestational trophoblastic disease

overview:
Summary
The gestational trophoblastic diseases (GTDs) are a complex family of disorders. The term GTD is a general one, used to describe any of the group of diagnoses that behave out of character from what is expected of gestational trophoblastic tissue. The term GTD refers to both benign and malignant conditions. Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN) refers more specifically to malignant disease.
GTDs all arise from trophoblast cells. Trophoblasts are the population of cells responsi-ble for the formation of the placenta, a temporary but essential organ responsible for both the delivery of nutrients to and removal of waste from the growing fetus. It is important to note that GTDs can arise in the context of both normal pregnancy or ‘molar pregnancy’. A molar pregnancy is one in which an ovum or sperm combine to form a genetically non-viable zygote (single-celled precursor to the fetus and placenta). In this discussion, molar pregnancy will be described in detail as it serves as the precursor to the majority of GTDs that develop.
The products of conception in a molar pregnancy (the non-viable embryo and placental tissue) are described as a hydatiform mole. Hydatiform moles can be farther described as being ‘complete’ or ‘partial’. Hydatiform moles are distinct according to their several characteristics. They differ in their genetics, content of recognizable fetal components, propensity for co-morbid features, and propensity to progress to malignant disease. Malignant GTNs known to arise from hydatiform moles include the ‘invasive mole’ and choriocarcinoma. Two additional entities that arise from trophoblastic cells but which arise independently from molar pregnancy include the placental site trophoblastic tumors and epithelioid trophoblastic tumors. All of these entities are discussed in detail below. Finally, there are a series of trophoblastic cell deriveatives that will also be described, but only in brief, as their significance to patient care is unclear. This includes the benign placental site nodule and exaggerated placental site.
Introduction
Hydatiform Moles
A molar pregnancy describes the fertilization event of a genetically non-viable ovum by sperm. The normal ovum and sperm both carry one-half of the genetic information required for a normal conception. Their fusion forms the zygote. The normal zygote is the single resultant cell that carries the full set of genetic material required for the development of a fetus. The DNA that the ovum and sperm contribute are equal in content but not function. The healthy zygote requires one half of its DNA to be from the ovum and the sperm. A zygote is non-viable in the case where there is, for example, a duplication of one half set. When there is an abnormal genetic contribution from either the ovum or the sperm, a hydatiform mole has formed. The hydatiform mole will mimic the developmental stages of a normal pregnancy. It will implant into the uterine cavity and begin to grow. The woman’s body will feel as she would in a normal pregnancy. The discussion on differentiating between a normal and a molar pregnancy is discussed in subsequent sections below.
An important distinction to be made about the hydatiform moles is that their growth is contained within the uterine cavity. The benign hydatiform mole carries a risk to develop into malignant disease but is not in of itself malignant. The risk for the formation of malignancy is related to the type of hydatiform mole, whether it is partial or complete. The differences between a complete and partial hydatiform mole, are based on their genetic make-up. The genetic make-up of the zygote at the time of fertilization depends on the genetics of the ovum and sperm involved.
The cells of the human body typically carry a ’diploid’ genotype of 46 chromosomes, half from the individual’s mother and half from their father. The normal set of chromosomes is described as either a 46XX or 46XY genotype. A complete mole carries a 46XX or 46XY genotype and in this way is seemingly similar to the genotype that the normal zygote carries. However, despite the normal number of DNA copies, there exists severe epigenetic abnormalities given that the source of the DNA is not derived evenly from the maternal ovum and paternal sperm. Ninety percent of complete moles result from the duplication of a sperm that fertilizes an “empty” ovum, wherein maternal chro-mosomes are absent or inactive. The other ten percent of complete molar pregnancies are due to fertilization of an empty ovum by two different sperm. A partial mole generally carries ‘triploid’ genotype, described as XXX or XXY. The partial mole results from the fertilization of a normal ovum by two sperm.
Invasive Mole
The invasive mole is the malignant counterpart to the partial and complete hydatiform moles previously described. This entity is defined by the capacity to invade beyond the endometrial layer of the uterus where a normal pregnancy resides. Most often the invasive mole is seen extending into the vagina, vulva, or peritoneum (abdominal cavity). While this entity is locally destructive, it generally is limited to the region and does not carry the capacity to metastasize to distant locations such as the lungs. The invasive mole is to the hydatiform moles in terms of its histology, its appearance microscopically. Invasive moles demonstrate numerous minute projections along their surface. These projections are called villi. These villi are a structural analog to the normal placenta, where they serve as the contact surface between the maternal blood supply and that of the fetus. Other entities in the family of GTDs do not demonstrate these villi.
Choriocarcinoma
The normal placenta is formed by two cell populations, the cytotrophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblasts. The cytotrophoblasts form a layer over which syncytiotrophoblasts lay. Both two cell populations are essential in the process of implanting an embryo into the maternal uterine wall and in establishing the proper supply of blood and nutrients to the embryo. The invasion process however should be self-limiting to the endometrial layer of the uterus. When a mass of these cytotrophoblast and syncytiotrophoblast cell populations form a mass that retains the ability to invade surrounding tissue and metastasize to distant locations in the body, such as the lungs, they have formed a choriocarcinoma. On a cellular level, the choriocarcinoma also differs from the invasive mole due to the loss of previously described villi.
Rare Trophoblastic Tumor Variants
Placental site trophoblastic tumors (PSTT) and epithelioid trophoblastic tumors (ETT) are two additional entities that can arise from the aforementioned family of tropho-blastic cells. Specifically, these entities arise from ‘intermediate trophoblasts’. The in-termediate trophoblasts generally serve to anchor the placenta into the uterus. The intermediate trophoblasts can be described by location, which is associated with subtle differences in cell characteristics. The PSTT arises from intermediate trophoblasts at the villous (uterine) surface. The ETT arises from intermediate trophoblasts at the chorinic (fetal) surface.

symptoms:
Hydatiform Moles
While molar pregnancy represents a non-viable fertilization event, women may feel like they would in a normal, healthy pregnancy and come to the physician with a positive pregnancy test. Women may also present with complaints of passing heavy clots, even tissue from the vagina, mimicking a spontaneous abortion.
Overall, the presentation of a partial molar pregnancy is different from that of a complete molar pregnancy. A partial hydatiform mole usually presents with a small uterus compared to the expected size for a given gestational age. On ultrasound, there will be an abnormal placenta with large cystic spaces, said to resemble Swiss cheese, a small amount amniotic fluid, and potentially shocking and upsetting: fetal parts, even an entire fetus. In the case that there is a formed fetus it is important to note that it is usually very growth restricted and at high risk for birth defects.
A complete hydatiform mole usually presents with a large uterus compared to the expected size for a given gestational age. On ultrasound, there will be no embryo, fetus, or amniotic fluid. There will be an abnormal placenta with small cystic spaces, said to resemble a snowstorm. When a complete molar pregnancy presents with the passage of tissue from the vagina, the tissue is said to resemble large grape-like masses with a ‘prune-juice’ discharge. Finally, complete hydatiform moles are also associated with ovarian theca lutein cysts, pre-eclampsia, and hyperthyroidism. Theca lutein cysts form from overstimulation by circulating hormones produced by the complete hydatiform mole and can cause abdominal pains as they rupture or bleed. Pre-eclampsia is a disorder characterized by new onset hypertension. Patients might experience headaches over the back of their head that does not respond to medication, stars in their field of vision, pain in the right upper portion of the abdomen under the ribs, shortness of breath, and swelling in the face, arms, or legs. Hyperthyroidism can present with intolerance to heat, hair and skin changes, weight loss, and palpitations. Any of these symptoms should prompt an immediate follow-up visit with the doctor.
Malignancy (Invasive Moles, Choriocarcinoma, Placental Site Trophoblastic Tumor, Ep-ithelioid Trophoblstic Tumor)
The GTNs can be subtle entities in terms of clinical presentation. The physician must keep these on the differential as a cause of common complaints including vaginal bleeding, uterine size discordant to gestation age, pelvic pain, hyperemesis, and miscarriage.
In dramatic clinical presentation of metastatic choriocarcinoma, patients present with symptoms based on the affected organ system. For example, metastasis to the lungs may be associated with hemoptysis, a bloody cough. Metastasis to the brain may present with seizure.
Generally, these entities are identified in the follow-up of molar pregnancies as described later below.

