Giant Congenital Melanocytic Nevus

synonyms:
bathing trunk nevuscape nevuscongenital pigmented nevusgarment nevusgiant brown birthmarkgiant hairy nevusgiant hairy pigmented nevusgiant molegiant nevushairy birthmarkleptomeningeal melanosismultiple congenital melanocytic nevineurocutaneous melanocytosisneurocutaneous melanosissatellite neviswimming trunk nevus

overview:
Summary
Congenital melanocytic nevi (CMN) are visible pigmented (melanocytic) proliferations in the skin that are present at birth. CMN are benign, tumor-like malformations resulting from faulty development of pigment cell (melanocyte) precursors in the embryo, and composed of an abnormal mixture of skin elements. Defined areas of these melanocytic proliferations cover surfaces at the base of the epidermis ranging from a few millimeters in diameter to large sectors of the body. In the larger forms, the CMN (single or multiple) also extend(s) vertically into the deeper dermis and more rarely, into the hypodermis or even subcutaneous tissues. The most superficial component of the CMN is the most highly pigmented, conferring brown-to-black shades to the overlying epidermis. CMN are usually classified according to their predicted largest diameter in adulthood, as if they were circular (predicted adult diameter or PAS). The most used classification assigns small CMN as less than 1.5 cm PAS, medium sized CMN between 1.5 to 19.9 cm, and large CMN 20 cm or greater. CMN measuring 50 cm or larger in PAS have been referred to as ‘giant congenital melanocytic nevi’.
CMN can be light brown to black patches or plaques, can present in variable ways, and cover nearly any size surface area or any part of the body. The incidence of CMN seems to be independent of skin color or other ethnic factors. Small to medium CMN are predicted to occur in more than one in a hundred births. Large and especially giant CMN, exceeding a predicted diameter at adult age of at least 20 cm on the body, form a much rarer subset, with prevalence estimated at around 1 in 50,000 births. Non-pigmented or small incipient congenital lesions can also be present – these are known as “tardive”; the emergence of so-called “satellite” nevi throughout the first few years of life in conjunction with larger CMN probably reflects the postnatal maturation of such precursors. On occasion, even a primary CMN can appear in a tardive manner. Treatment options currently are exclusively surgical. Neurocutaneous melanocytosis, cited in earlier literature as neurocutaneous melanosis (NCM), is a neurological and cutaneous disorder characterized by abnormal aggregations of nevomelanocytes within the central nervous system and the skin. NCM is a complication of the larger forms of CMN, or multiple smaller CMN, in a fraction of patients. Recent studies find the incidence of symptomatic and asymptomatic NCM together to range between 5 and 15 % of all persons with large and giant CMN. Melanoma develops in an estimated 1-2% of patients with LCMN or NCM, more frequently and at earlier ages than in the general population.
Introduction
The first recorded descriptions of children with large CMN date from observations published by the Count of Buffon before the French Revolution. Other giant, sometimes rugous CMN were described in the early 19th century.
CMN tend to grow in a proportional fashion to the child’s growth; occasionally growth appears out of proportion to the child during periods of particularly rapid growth such as early infancy. A new size/color/texture classification, recently developed by Marghoob, Krengel and other experts in the field, may eventually help in better predicting patients at the greatest risk for developing melanoma or neurological disease by more reproducibly classifying similar patients. Nomograms can assist clinicians in easily determining the PAS of a nevus examined at any point during childhood.

symptoms:
Large/giant CMN are obvious at birth, most commonly covering an aspect of the trunk and less common on the head, neck and extremities. Affected areas of large CMN have been designated as “cape”, “bathing trunk”, “tippet” or “garment” CMN due to their respective distributions. Lesions may have irregular or geographic borders. In about 75% of cases, multiple small CMN will accompany the large CMN, usually in a generalized manner. “Satellite” is a commonly used description of discrete small or medium CMN or tardive nevi in the presence of a large/giant CMN, though semantically and molecularly, it is more accurate to refer to “disseminated” lesions. These additional smaller, disseminated CMN may be present at birth and/or may increase to significant numbers over the first few years of life. These multiple CMN should be noted in number, as greater numbers (>20) have been correlated with neurological anomalies.
In general, CMN can be tan, brown to dark-brown or black and rarely blue in color and may be flat, raised, or even quite thickened at birth. Color may be quite uniform throughout, or consist of multiple colors including shades of brown, black, red or blue. Texture may be smooth, highly nodular or cobblestone-like; hair may or may not be present at birth and may or may not develop as the child ages. This hair is fine (vellus) or more often coarse (terminal) in texture. A “cerebriform” or brain-like texture may be present, particularly in large scalp CMN. Areas of the nevus may be infiltrated by overgrowths of fatty or nerve tissue, so-called lipomatous or neurotized areas respectively, features that can be seen most often in larger CMN.
Over time, CMN may become darker or lighter, more or less heterogenous in color and the surface texture may change. CMN can also develop superimposed nodules, which are usually benign but require surveillance. The CMN-involved skin can be dry and develop overlying eczema, resulting in intermittent or chronic itchiness (pruritis). CMN may also have fewer sweat glands than unaffected skin, resulting in potential overheating episodes or increased sweating in other areas of the body to compensate. Areas of larger CMN may have notably less fat under the skin, particularly around the flanks, limbs and buttocks.
At birth or within the first few weeks of life, transient erosions or ulcerations may develop over large CMN due to incomplete maturation of the skin during this period. Healing usually occurs over days to weeks. Also notable during the infantile period are rapidly growing ‘proliferative nodules’ within the CMN that mimic melanoma but show benign features when examined. Evaluation of these nodules by a dermatopathologist with expertise in pigmented lesions is recommended to avoid unnecessary surgery and possible toxic adjuvant therapy if misdiagnosed as melanoma. Significant lightening of color in large CMN can also been seen in the first few years of life, especially those that involve the scalp.

