Giant Cell Arteritis

synonyms:
cranial arteritisGCAgranulomatous arteritistemporal arteritis (Horton's disease)

overview:
Giant cell arteritis (GCA) is the most common blood vessel disorder in persons over 50 years old that causes inflammation of medium and large-sized arteries in the body (vasculitis). GCA causes changes in blood vessel walls leading to poor blood circulation. Arteries most affected in giant cell arteritis are the temporal artery and other cranial arteries (now called cranial-GCA), but inflammation of the aorta and other large arteries in the body can occur as well and may present differently (now called large vessel-GCA). If left untreated, this can lead to a medical emergency where sudden blindness occurs without early detection and treatment. Signs and symptoms when the temporal or other cranial arteries are involved include arm pain, pulsing headaches on one side or on the back of the head, jaw pain, scalp tenderness, double vision or other visual disturbances, bulging temporal artery that is tender with skin edema and redness. It can also present with constitutional symptoms such as polymyalgia, fevers, anorexia, and weight loss, a presentation of LV-GCA. The cause of giant cell arteritis is still unknown but is thought to be from the immune system causing damage to the body’s own blood vessels. Polymyalgia rheumatica is an inflammatory disorder that is closely related to giant cell arteritis and occurs in 40% to 60% of patients with giant call arteritis. 15% to 20% of persons with polymyalgia rheumatica will have giant cell arteritis. Treatments available include steroids (corticosteroids) that will help with symptoms and reoccurrence and medications that weaken the immune system.

symptoms:
Common symptoms when the temporal arteries (located on each side of the head) are affected are headaches with the artery being tender, thicker, nodular, and pulsating early-on but may become blocked later-on. Headaches are present in more than 60% of patients. The temporal artery and its parietal and frontal branches may bulge while appearing twisted/ knotted under the scalp and feel tender with skin edema and redness and may become pulseless.
Visual disturbances like double vision or transient loss of vision can occur in one or both eyes that are not long lasting. However, serious complications can occur such as blindness that occurs in 15% to 30% of patients that is not reversible with steroids. Blindness in just one eye occurs as well, but if left untreated 25% to 50% of patients can experience loss of vision in the other eye.
Arteries in other parts of the body can be affected as well. The aorta, the largest artery in the body can be affected as well and cause arm pain or increase risk for severe complications such as thinning of arterial wall in the artery leading to aneurysm and rarely arterial dissection. Risk for stroke and nervous system disorders can occur but is uncommon.
Inflammation throughout the body is common as well and can present with fever, fatigue, weight loss, discomfort, night sweats, depression, and anemia. Respiratory symptoms can also occur with dry non-mucus cough.

