Gilbert Syndrome

synonyms:
constitutional liver dysfunctionfamilial nonhemolytic jaundiceGilbert-Lereboullet syndromeGilbert's diseasehyperbilirubinemia IMeulengracht's diseaseunconjugated benign bilirubinemia

overview:
Gilbert syndrome is a mild genetic liver disorder in which the body cannot properly process bilirubin, a yellowish waste product that is formed when old or worn out red blood cells are broken down (hemolysis). Individuals with Gilbert syndrome have elevated levels of bilirubin (hyperbilirubinemia), because they have a reduced level of a specific liver enzyme required for elimination of bilirubin. Most affected individuals have no symptoms (asymptomatic) or may only exhibit mild yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes, and whites of the eyes (jaundice). Jaundice may not be apparent until adolescence. Bilirubin levels may increase following stress, exertion, dehydration alcohol consumption, fasting, and/or infection. In some individuals, jaundice may only be apparent when triggered by one of these conditions. Gilbert syndrome is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.

symptoms:
Although Gilbert syndrome may become apparent shortly after birth, it may not be recognized for many years. Episodes of mild jaundice may appear in young adults and is more common in males than females. Frequently, episodes of jaundice are overlooked. Gilbert syndrome is associated with fluctuating levels of bilirubin in the blood (hyperbilirubinemia). Bilirubin levels may increase with stress, strain, dehydration, fasting, infection or exposure to cold. In many individuals, jaundice is only evident when one of these triggers raises the bilirubin levels.
Some affected individuals have reported vague, unspecific symptoms including fatigue, weakness and gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea, abdominal discomfort, and diarrhea. Researchers do not believe that these symptoms are related to excess bilirubin in the blood and may occur coincidentally or due to other reasons such as anxiety over the diagnosis.

