Gitelman Syndrome

synonyms:
familial hypokalemia-hypomagnesemiahypomagnesemia-hypokalemia with hypocalciuria

overview:
Summary
Gitelman syndrome, also known as familial hypokalemia-hypomagnesemia, is a rare genetic disorder in which there is a specific defect in kidney function. This defect impairs the kidney’s ability to reabsorb salt and causes changes in various electrolyte concentrations as well as contraction of extracellular fluid volume (thus causing symptoms of dehydration). The electrolytes affected are primarily mineral ions, specifically potassium, calcium, magnesium, sodium, and chloride. Fundamentally, like Bartter’s syndrome, Gitelman syndrome is a salt wasting nephropathy. The symptoms and severity of the disorder can vary greatly from one person to another and can range from mild to severe. For unknown reasons, the onset of symptoms is frequently delayed until the second decade of life. Symptoms and severity can even vary greatly among members of the same family. Common symptoms can include episodes of fatigue, muscle weakness, and muscle cramps sometimes accompanied by gastrointestinal problems such as abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting. Some individuals may need to urinate frequently and will pass a large volume of urine (polyuria). This symptom is the result of failure to fully concentrate urine in the face of dehydration. Most cases of Gitelman syndrome are caused by mutations in theSLC12A3gene and are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
Introduction
Gitelman syndrome is often discussed along with Bartter syndrome, a group of several disorders characterized by similar defects in kidney function leading to volume depletion and similar symptoms as is seen in Gitelman syndrome. Sometimes known as a variant of Bartter syndrome, Gitelman syndrome can show significant overlap with Bartter syndrome type 3; in specific cases, it is extremely difficult to distinguish between these disorders. Some researchers believe it is better to consider the Bartter syndrome and Gitelman syndrome as a spectrum of disease rather than distinct disorders. These disorders may be broadly classified as renal tubulopathies (because certain small tubes within the kidneys are affected), salt-wasting disorders (because affected individuals excrete excess amounts of salt), salt-losing tubulopathies or channelopathies (because the ion channels in the kidneys are affected). Gitelman syndrome causes metabolic abnormalities resembling treatment with high dosage of thiazide diuretics while Bartter syndrome resembles treatment with high dosage of loop diuretics.
Most medical sources will use specific terminology to describe the electrolyte imbalances that characterize Gitelman syndrome. These terms refer to findings on laboratory tests rather than specific symptoms. Such terms include low levels of potassium in the blood (hypokalemia), low levels of chloride in the blood (hypochloremia), excess alkaline levels in the body (metabolic alkalosis), low levels of magnesium in the blood (hypomagnesemia), low levels of calcium in the urine (hypocalciuria), high levels of renin in the blood (hyperreninemia), and high levels of aldosterone in the blood (hyperaldosteronemia). The latter two laboratory findings are appropriate regulatory responses to dehydration caused by salt wasting kidney.
disease.

symptoms:
Gitelman syndrome usually becomes apparent anywhere from late childhood (usually over the age of six) to early adulthood. The disorder is highly variable, even among individuals in the same family. Some people do not develop any symptoms (asymptomatic), while others can develop chronic issues that can impact their quality of life.
Muscle weakness, spasms, and cramps may occur and generally are more common in Gitelman syndrome than the related Bartter syndrome. Affected individuals may experiences episodes of fatigue, dizziness, fainting (due to low blood pressure), muscle weakness, muscle aches, cramps and spasms. Affected individuals may also experience a specific form of cramping spasms called tetany. Tetany is marked by cramping spasms of certain muscles, particularly those of the hands and feet, arms, legs and/or face. Tetany may be provoked by hyperventilation during periods of anxiety.
Symptomatic episodes may also be accompanied by abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea or constipation, and fever. Vomiting or diarrhea in a patient with Gitelman syndrome may lead to the misdiagnosis of eating disorder or cathartic abuse as the cause of hypokalemia. Falsely accusing a patient with Gitelman or Bartter syndrome of these behaviors can cause loss of trust as well as adverse psychological and emotional consequences. Measurement of urinary chloride will help differentiate Gitelman syndrome (high urinary chloride) from hypokalemia resulting from GI fluid losses. (urine chloride < 10 meQ/L). Seizures may also occur and in some people may be the initial reason they seek medical assistance. A loss of sensation or feeling of the face (facial paresthesia) characterized by numbness or tingling is common. Less often, tingling or numbness may affect the hands. The severity of fatigue can vary widely. Some individuals are severely fatigued to the point where it interferes with daily activities; other individuals never report fatigue as a specific symptom.
Affected individuals may or may not experience excessive thirst (polydipsia) and a frequent need to urinate (polyuria) including the excessive need to urinate at night (nocturia). When these symptoms do occur they are usually mild. Blood pressure can be abnormally low (hypotension) in comparison to the general population. Affected individuals often crave salt or high-salt foods. Salt craving frequently begins in childhood and is helpful in making a correct diagnosis.
Some affected adults develop chondrocalcinosis, a condition characterized by the accumulation of calcium in the joints. Its development is thought to be related to hypomagnesemia. Affected joints may be swollen, tender, reddened, and warm to the touch. In some individuals, chondrocalcinosis and its complications are the only symptoms that develop.
Gitelman syndrome is generally considered to be a milder variant of Bartter syndrome, with symptoms often overlapping with Bartter syndrome type 3 (classic Bartter syndrome). Renal salt wasting is more severe and begins earlier in life in Bartter syndrome than in Gitelman syndrome. However, researchers have determined that in rare cases more severe complications can occur in the newborn (neonatal) period. In these cases, affected infants experience severe hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia, which can be associated with an increased need to urinate and passage of large amounts of urine (polyuria), diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), muscle spasms, growth delays and a failure to grow and gain weight as would be expected based on age and gender (failure to thrive). Earlier-onset, more severe cases have occurred in greater frequency in male infants than female infants.
In affected individuals who experience significant electrolyte imbalances, irregular heartbeats (cardiac arrhythmias) may develop. Although rare, if untreated, these cardiac arrhythmias can potentially progress to cause sudden cardiac arrest and potentially sudden death. These cardiac issues result from a prolonged QT interval. The QT-interval is measured on the electrocardiogram and, if prolonged, indicates that the heart muscle is taking longer than usual to recharge between beats.
Some affected individuals may develop the breakdown of muscle tissue causing the release of toxic content of muscle cells into the body fluids (rhabdomyolysis). Rhabdomyolysis is a serious condition that can potentially damage the kidneys. Additional symptoms have been reported in the medical literature but are quite rare. These symptoms include blurred vision, vertigo, and an impaired ability to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia). A study from Yale indicated that Gitelman and Bartter syndrome have significant impact to quality of life (Cruz D et al., 2001).
In a study of a series of individuals with Gitelman syndrome (Berry et al. 2013), it was determined that affected individuals can develop abnormally high blood pressure (hypertension) later during life (median 55 years of age). This is counterintuitive in a salt-wasting disorder that can cause low blood pressure earlier in life. The exact reason for the development of hypertension is unknown, but may be related to prolonged exposure to renin and aldosterone levels (see Causes section below) and often occurs in the presence of traditional risk factors for hypertension. Some women have experienced severe potassium wasting during pregnancy and have required increased potassium and magnesium supplementation.

