Glucose Transporter Type 1 Deficiency Syndrome

synonyms:
De Vivo diseaseglucose transporter protein syndromeGlut1 deficiency syndromeGlut1DS

overview:
SummaryGlucose transporter type 1 deficiency syndrome (Glut1DS) is a rare genetic metabolic disorder characterized by deficiency of a protein that is required for glucose (a simple sugar) to cross the blood-brain barrier and other tissue barriers. The most common symptom is seizures (epilepsy), which usually begin within the first few months of life. However, the symptoms and severity of Glut1DS can vary substantially from one person to another. For example, some affected individuals may not develop epilepsy. Additional symptoms that can occur include abnormal eye-head movements, body movement disorders, developmental delays and varying degrees of cognitive impairment, slurred speech and language abnormalities. Glut1DS is caused by changes (disease-causing variants) in theSLC2A1gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. Rarely, the condition also may be inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Glut1DS does not respond to traditional epilepsy treatments (e.g., anti-seizure medications), but is successfully treated with the ketogenic diet.
IntroductionGlut1DS was first described in the medical literature in 1991 by Dr. De Vivo, et al. The disorder is also known as De Vivo disease. Glut1DS is classified as a developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE). Epileptic encephalopathies are a group of disorders in which seizure activity is associated with progressive psychomotor disturbance. Paroxysmal exercise-induced dyskinesias (PED), also known previously as dystonia 18 and dystonia 9, are now considered part of the Glut1DS spectrum. Epilepsy commonly presents in infancy whereas PED commonly emerges in childhood and adolescence.

symptoms:
Glut1DS represents a clinical spectrum disease. The symptoms and severity can vary dramatically from one individual to another. Patients with mild cases often go undiagnosed, while other patients can potentially have severe, debilitating complications. It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all the classic symptoms discussed below or may have less severe symptoms. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific clinical features, standard management and prognosis.
The classic presentation of Glut1DS is the development of seizures during infancy, usually during the first six months of life. The type, frequency and severity of seizures vary from one individual to another. In some individuals, seizures may be a daily occurrence; in other individuals, seizure episodes may be separated by days, weeks, or months. Five different seizure types can occur including generalized tonic-clonic, myoclonic, atypical absence, atonic and unclassified.
Generalized tonic-clonic seizures (once known as grand mal seizures), usually last a minute or more and are characterized by stiffening of the limbs (tonic phase) and then repeated jerking of the limbs and face (clonic phase). Generalized tonic-clonic seizures can cause people to momentarily lose consciousness, bite their lips, or drool.
Myoclonic seizures are characterized by brief muscle contractions that cause abnormal, jerky movements.
Atypical absence seizures are associated with a brief period of unconsciousness usually marked by unresponsive staring. Absence seizures usually begin and end abruptly and the affected individual usually resumes activity with no memory of the episode. Absence seizures do not cause convulsions and may be so mild that they go unnoticed. Often these seizures may be misinterpreted as “daydreaming”.Atonic seizures cause a sudden loss of muscle tone and limpness. They can cause the head to drop or nod, problems with posture or sudden falls. Atonic seizures are also known as drop attacks. Atonic seizures can lead to injuries of the head and face because of sudden, unexpected falls. When sitting, affected individuals may collapse forward or backward at the waist. Atonic seizures may only partially affect consciousness and usually last only a few seconds.
Unclassified seizures do not clearly fit into any of the standard seizure categories.
Additional symptoms associated with Glut1DS include deceleration of head growth during infancy. Affected individuals can develop mild to moderate delays in attaining developmental milestones. Deceleration of head growth may lead to acquired microcephaly in some individuals, a condition marked by head circumference measurements that fall below the 3rd percentile for age and sex.
Individuals with Glut1DS may also develop disorders of movement including diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), poor balance or difficulty coordinating voluntary movements (ataxia), slow, stiff limb movements (spasticity) and awkward postures (dystonia). Dystonia is a general term for a group of muscle disorders generally characterized by involuntary muscle contractions that force the body into abnormal, sometimes painful, movements and positions (postures). Movement disorders associated with Glut1DS can cause difficulty walking. Such difficulties can be a constant problem or may come and go (episodic or paroxysmal) often triggered by exercise.
Individuals with Glut1DS also develop varying degrees of cognitive impairment, which can range from mild learning difficulties to severe intellectual disability. Some degree of speech and language impairment is usually present as well. Individuals may have trouble speaking due to abnormalities affecting the muscles that enable speech (dysarthria) and control the smooth flow or expression of speech (dysfluency). Speaking may be marked by frequent pauses or interruptions.
Individuals with Glut1DS generally are friendly and enjoy socializing with others. Social adaptive behavior is viewed as a relative strength and affected individuals are comfortable in group situations.
Additional symptoms have been reported in individuals with Glut1 deficiency syndrome including mental confusion, lethargy, drowsiness (somnolence), rapid eye and head movements in both horizontal and vertical directions in infancy, paralysis of one side of the body (hemiparesis), total body paralysis and recurrent headaches. Sleep disturbances including sleep apnea also have been reported in individuals. These various symptoms can vary in severity and may be influenced by additional factors such as fatigue or extended periods of time without eating (fasting). Sleep apnea and abnormal eye-head movements, like seizures, usually present in infancy as one of the first clinical signs and should immediately alert the physician to Glut1DS as a possible diagnosis. Early diagnosis and treatment are associated with a better long-term prognosis.
Although most affected individuals develop so-called classic Glut1DS, some individuals develop different (non-classic) presentations (phenotypes). Some affected individuals develop movement disorders and cognitive impairment without epilepsy. In addition, a few individuals have been asymptomatic or had only mild symptoms of the disorder. These individuals might have a mixture of normal and variantSLC2A1genes, a condition known as mosaicism. These asymptomatic individuals often are the parents of symptomatic children who are identified by genetic testing.
Some individuals with variants in theSLC2A1gene have been identified who have paroxysmal exercise-induced dyskinesia (PED), a condition in which episodes of abnormal, involuntary movements occur, brought on by prolonged exercise such as walking or running long distances. These individuals may or may not have epilepsy as well.

