Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency

synonyms:
G6PD deficiencyG6PD

overview:
Summary

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is a genetic metabolic abnormality caused by deficiency of the enzyme G6PD. This enzyme is critical for the proper function of red blood cells: when the level of this enzyme is too low, red blood cells can break down prematurely (hemolysis). When the body cannot compensate for accelerated loss, anemia develops. However, deficiency of this enzyme is not sufficient to cause hemolysis on its own; additional factors are required to “trigger” the onset of symptoms. Triggers of hemolysis in G6PD-deficient persons include certain infectious diseases, certain drugs, and eating fava beans: this can cause a potentially serious acute hemolytic anemia known as favism. Symptoms can include fatigue, pale color, jaundice or yellow skin color, shortness of breath, rapid heartbeat, dark urine and enlarged spleen (splenomegaly).
Most important, in the absence of triggering factors, the majority of people with G6PD deficiency are normal, and they sail through life without any knowledge or any noticeable symptoms of the disorder. G6PD deficiency is caused by alterations (mutations) in theG6PDgene, and it maps to the X chromosome.

Introduction

As many as 400 different genetic variants of G6PD deficiency have been reported, and for 186 the precise mutation is known. The World Health Organization (WHO) has classified variants on the basis of residual enzyme activity and of disease severity. Class I are the most severe variants: those in which there is chronic hemolysis even in the absence of any triggering factor. Class II and III are variants with marked enzyme deficiency but no chronic hemolysis; class IV are variants with normal enzyme activity; class V was designed for variants with increased enzyme activity. Among the variants of which the clinical implications have been best characterized are G6PD Mediterranean, G6PD A- and G6PD Mahidol.

symptoms:
As stated above, most G6PD-deficient persons are asymptomatic most of the time; however, any one of them, when exposed to certain triggering factors, can develop acute hemolytic anemia (AHA), which may be life-threatening especially in children. Triggers for AHA in G6PD deficient persons include: (a) certain drugs (see Causes section), (b) certain infectious diseases, (c) ingestion of fava beans. The onset of symptoms is within 2-3 days after exposure to the trigger (even less with fava beans).
A hemolytic anemia episode may be preceded by behavioral changes such as irritability or lethargy. Most episodes, even severe ones, are usually self-limiting and resolve on their own. The severity of episodes can vary greatly. Symptoms can include fatigue, pale color, shortness of breath, rapid heartbeat, dark urine, a sudden rise in body temperature, lower back pain, and an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly). Yellowing of the eyes, mucous membranes and skin (jaundice) is common. Gastrointestinal symptoms such as diarrhea, nausea or abdominal discomfort or pain may also occur.
G6PD deficiency can cause neonatal jaundice, which is one of the most common conditions requiring medical attention in newborns. Jaundice is caused by excess levels of bilirubin in the blood. Bilirubin is an orange-yellow bile pigment that is a byproduct of the natural breakdown of hemoglobin in red blood cells. In rare cases in certain populations, if untreated, neonatal jaundice can progress to cause neurological issues such as kernicterus, a condition characterized by the accumulation of toxic levels of bilirubin in the brain, which cause lack of energy, poor feeding, fever, and vomiting.
Acute hemolytic anemia from eating fava beans (favism) can be rapid. Favism can occur at any age, but occurs more often and more severely in children. A child may have a slightly elevated temperature within 24-48 hours and can become irritable and unruly, or subdued and lethargic. Nausea, abdominal pain and diarrhea may develop. Vomiting only occurs rarely. Within 6 to 24 hours, urine may become noticeably dark and can appear red, brown or even black. Affected children may become pale and their resting heartrate may be high (tachycardia). Jaundice can also develop and the liver and spleen may become enlarged. In severe cases, evidence may be seen of hypovolemic shock, in which blood and fluid loss is so severe that the heart cannot pump enough blood to the body, or, less likely, heart failure.
In rare cases, certain affected individuals (i.e. those with class I variants) may experience chronic hemolytic anemia that is ongoing and occurs without the need for a triggering factor. These individuals may be referred to as having a type of congenital nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia. Such individuals are almost always male and usually develop neonatal jaundice. Affected children may also have an enlarged spleen. Most have a mild to moderate anemia, but severe, transfusion-dependent anemia can develop. Affected individuals can potentially develop severe complications such as hypovolemic shock. In rare cases, severe acute hemolysis has led to acute kidney failure.

