Glutaric Aciduria Type I

synonyms:
GA1glutaric acidemia type Iglutaric aciduria type Iglutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency

overview:
Summary
Glutaric aciduria type I (GA1) is a rare hereditary metabolic disorder caused by a deficiency of the mitochondrial enzyme glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase (GCDH). It is in the group of disorders known as cerebral organic acidemias. Individuals with this condition have deficiency or absence of GCDH enzyme that is involved in the lysine metabolism. GCDH deficiency results in increased concentrations of potentially neurotoxic metabolites, glutaric acid (GA), 3-hydroxy glutaric acid (3-OH-GA) and glutaconic acid within body tissues, especially within the brain, and also non-toxic glutarylcarnitine (C5DC). Two biochemical subtypes have been defined, high (HE) and low excretors (LE), depending on residual enzyme activity and the amount of GA in the urine.
Newborns may show unspecific clinical signs like enlarged head circumference (macrocephaly) or decreased muscle tone (hypotonia). Without treatment, most affected children develop an acute encephalopathic crisis (AEC) following episodes of fever or other catabolic conditions resulting in bilateral striatal injury and consequently, dystonic movement disorder (MD), within the first three years of life. Single acute-onset events have been reported up to the age of six years. Besides acute-onset, individuals with insidious-onset type of striatal injury without an apparent crisis have also been described. Sometimes babies with GA1 have been mistaken to have been abused because they may present with subdural hemorrhages (SDH).
Since early diagnosis and treatment dramatically improve outcome and prognosis, GA1 has been included in the newborn screening (NBS) panel in a constantly growing number of countries worldwide which is essential for early intervention. Importantly, some low excretor patients may be missed by newborn screening due to normal C5DC concentrations.

Introduction
For 80-90% of people with GA1, motor symptom development is preventable, but this requires early diagnosis by NBS and metabolic treatment according to guideline recommendations from birth on. Metabolic treatment consists of a low lysine diet with supplementation of a lysine-free, tryptophane-reduced and arginine-fortified amino acid supplement and oral carnitine supplementation as well as intermittent emergency treatment during episodes that are likely to induce catabolism, such as fever. If treatment is delayed or inadequate, motor symptoms begin to manifest acutely or insidiously during infancy or early childhood (before the age of 6) and are often highly variable.

symptoms:
Babies with GA1 are born healthy and may only have unspecific signs like macrocephaly or muscular hypotonia at birth. Macrocephaly is one of the earliest signs of GA1 so newborns with an enlarged head circumference should be evaluated for GA1. Especially during the age of 3 months to 3 years, most affected untreated babies develop an acute encephalopathic crisis which is triggered by catabolic conditions such as febrile infections, febrile reactions to vaccinations or surgery. These crises result in striatal injury and a complex, mostly dystonic, irreversible and severe movement disorder which is associated with high morbidity and mortality. These babies can experience several symptoms resembling those of cerebral palsy, such as frequently assuming odd positions due to disordered muscle tone (dystonia), involuntary and ceaseless slow, sinuous, writhing (athetotic) or jerky (choreic) movements of the trunk and limbs. Controlling the movement of hands, arms, feet, legs, head and neck may become very hard and muscle spasms may occur. Repeated stress on the body (such as infection and fever) can cause symptoms to worsen, but in some children, brain damage will occur without a triggering fever.
Clinical early signs suggesting an “acute encephalopathic crisis” may comprise:
•	Irritability•	Jitteriness•	Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea•	Hypotonia (low muscle tone)•	Poor appetite or difficulty feeding•	Lack of energy/sleepy•	Muscle weakness
Possible irreversible neurologic symptoms of an acute encephalopathic crisis are:
•	Dyskinesia-disorder of involuntary muscle movements•	Dystonia – fixed abnormal postures due to abnormally increased muscle tone•	Orofacial dyskinesia•	Choreoathetosis—irregular migrating contractions, twisting, writhing•	Abnormality of eye movement- nystagmus (involuntary shaking of the eyes)•	Cognitive impairment (highly variable and not seen in many patients)•	Developmental regression•	Opisthotonus- full body spasms•	Coma
Besides acute-onset, individuals with insidious onset type of striatal injury have been reported in up to 50% of symptomatic patients in NBS cohorts, primarily associated with deviations from dietary treatment recommendations. These patients show a milder degree of dystonic MD and a characteristic striatal injury pattern restricted to the dorsolateral putamen.After age 6 years, a new onset of striatal injury has not been reported.
Besides striatal pathology, all GA1 patients additionally may develop numerous extrastriatal MRI abnormalities, such as frontotemporal hypoplasia, widening of anterior temporal CSF spaces and the Sylvian fissure or white matter abnormalities.
Although HE and LE patients have the same risk for developing striatal injury, HE patients show increased frequency of extra-striatal abnormalities, higher intracerebral concentrations of GA and 3-OHGA, larger head circumference, increased SDH and a poorer cognitive outcome.
Some patients have been diagnosed in adolescence or adulthood (late-onset) with unspecific neurologic symptoms, such as polyneuropathy, incontinence, headache, dementia, tremor or epilepsy, without striatal injury.
GA1 is associated with an increased risk of developing traumatic or incidental SDH and hygroma. SDH manifests mostly during the first 3 years of life, with a peak in late infancy and affecting primarily HE patients, usually associated with additional characteristic neuroradiologic abnormalities on MRI. In recent years, other neurologic disease manifestations have been reported such as chronic kidney disease in adolescent and adult patients.

