Glutaric Aciduria Type II

synonyms:
electron transfer flavoprotein, deficiency ofelectron transfer flavoprotein: ubiquinone oxidoreductase, deficiency ofGAIIGlutaric Acidemia IIGlutaric Aciduria IIGA2Ethylmalonic adipic aciduria (EMA)MADDmultiple acyl-Co-A dehydrogenase deficiency

overview:
Glutaric aciduria type II (GAII) is one of the conditions termed organic acidemias. Individuals with these conditions have a deficiency or absence of an enzyme that prevents the breakdown of certain chemicals (proteins and fats) in the body, resulting in the accumulation of several organic acids in the blood and urine. Two enzymes that may be deficient in GAII are electron transfer flavoprotein (ETF) and ETF-dehydrogenase (ETFDH). The severity of GAll varies widely among affected individuals. A complete enzyme deficiency causes a severe form of the disorder termed neonatal GAll that is associated with a short life span and, sometimes, with specific physical birth defects. Individuals with this form may be born with physical abnormalities including brain malformations, enlarged liver, kidney malformations, unusual facial features, and genital abnormalities. They may also emit an odor resembling sweaty feet. The less severe form of the disorder is termed late onset GAll, which may appear in infancy, childhood, or even adulthood. Most often, GAll first appears in infancy or early childhood as a sudden episode of a metabolic crisis, that can cause weakness, behavior changes (such as poor feeding and decreased activity) nausea, vomiting and low blood sugar (hypoglycemia). GAII is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder caused by mutations in theETFA,ETFB, orETFDHgenes. Treatment varies depending on the severity and symptoms but often includes a low fat, low protein, and high carbohydrate diet.

symptoms:
Signs and symptoms of GAII vary greatly depending on the age of onset and severity of the condition in each affected individual.
There are three main subtypes of GAII: the neonatal form with congenital anomalies, the neonatal form without congenital anomalies, and the late onset form. Newborns with the neonatal (first 4 weeks of life) form without congenital anomalies may have severe hypoglycemia, respiratory distress, low muscle tone, an odor of sweaty feet, liver (hepatomegaly), heart (cardiomyopathy) and kidney abnormalities.
In addition to these symptoms, neonates having GAII with congenital anomalies may also present with an abnormally large head (macrocephaly), high forehead, flat nasal bridge, malformed ears, genital abnormalities, brain malformations, enlarged weak heart (cardiomyopathy), fluid-filled renal cysts, and unusual facial features. Complete enzyme deficiency found in severely affected patients with the neonatal form is not compatible with life beyond the first few days/weeks of life.
Symptoms present in patients with the late onset form of GAII generally appear in childhood to adulthood, are less severe and highly variable. Muscle weakness is the most common symptom of this late onset form and individuals may have intermittent vomiting and hypoglycemia.  Some of these patients may respond very well to high dose oral riboflavin treatment.

