Glycogen Storage Disease Type V

synonyms:
Glycogenosis Type VGlycogen Storage Disease type V (GSD-V)GSD-VMcArdle DiseaseMyophosphorylase DeficiencyMuscle Glycogen Phosphorylase Deficiency

overview:
Glycogen storage disease type V (GSD-V or McArdle disease) is the most common disorder of skeletal muscle carbohydrate metabolism and one of most frequent genetic myopathies (prevalence ~1:100000). Twelve different types of glycogen storage disease have been described (type 0, I-VII, IX, XI-XIII), which result from defects in glycogen synthesis and breakdown principally in the muscle and liver, although other tissues can also be affected. GSD-V is caused by the lack of the muscle glycogen phosphorylase (myophosphorylase) enzyme. Although symptoms typically begin during the first ten years of life, the age of diagnosis can vary significantly. The characteristic symptoms of GSD-V are exercise intolerance, myalgia (muscle pain), muscle stiffness and contractures, quick fatigue as well as hyperCKemia and myoglobinuria (dark, burgundy-colored urine due to the presence of myoglobin, a protein found in heart and muscles). These symptoms are usually caused by isometric or uninterrupted aerobic exercise. Currently, there is no cure for GSD-V.  To manage GSD-V, medical professionals suggest that people affected avoid intense exercise and a completely inactive lifestyle, but do engage in consistent, reasonable aerobic exercise.

symptoms:
GSD-V is characterized by exercise intolerance. This typically consists in acute crises of early fatigue and muscle stiffness and contractures, especially at the start of the exercise, that usually disappear if exercise is stopped or the intensity is reduced. Symptoms usually present within the first ten years of life, but there is a wide range of clinical onset and severity. Some GSD-V patients have mild symptoms while another form progresses quickly and is apparent shortly after the person is born.  Progressively weak muscles, in some individuals, do not manifest until the age of sixty to seventy years old.
Muscles of affected patients usually function normally while at rest or during moderate exercise. Only during strenuous exercise do severe muscle cramps occur.  Exercising in the presence of severe pain results in muscle damage (rhabdomyolysis) and myoglobinuria in about 50% of those affected.  The myoglobin protein can also damage the kidneys and lead to develop life-threatening kidney failure if not treated promptly.
A unique feature of the disease is the so-called “second wind” phenomenon, which most patients refers to as the ability to resume dynamic, large mass exercise, if they take a brief rest upon the appearance of premature fatigue early in exercise. This “second wind” phenomenon is present in approximately ~90% of people with GSD-V.
A severity scale has been developed to describe the variation in clinical features:
Type 0= asymptomatic or virtually asymptomatic (mild exercise intolerance but not functional limitation in any daily life activity).Type 1= exercise intolerance, contractures, myalgia, and limitation of acute strenuous exercise and occasionally in daily life activities; no record of myoglobinuria, no muscle wasting or weakness.Type 2= same as 1 and also recurrent exertional myoglobinuria, moderate restriction in exercise and limitation in daily life activities.Type 3= same as 2 and also fixed muscle weakness, with or without wasting, and severe limitations on exercise and most daily life activities.

