Glycogen Storage Disease Type 7

synonyms:
GSD7muscle phosphofructokinase deficiencyPFKM DeficiencyTarui disease

overview:
Summary

Glycogen storage diseases are a group of diseases where the body’s form of stored energy (glycogen) cannot be broken down into smaller pieces of sugars (glucose) for the body to use. People with glycogen storage disease type 7 (GSD7) usually have symptoms during childhood, but some people may have symptoms beginning as infants or later as adults. GSD7 symptoms are
Muscle weakness, pain, cramps and stiffnessNausea, and vomiting during exercise
GSD7 is caused by harmful changes (mutations) in the gene for muscle phosphofructokinase (PFKM) that leads to lowered activity (deficiency) in the phosphofructokinase enzyme, the protein that breaks down glycogen to glucose. The lack of this enzyme leads to a decreased amount of energy available to muscles during exercise. GSD7 is passed down in families in an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance.
There is no specific cure or treatment for GSD7, but people with GSD7 are recommended to avoid heavy exercise and avoid eating meals with high amounts of carbohydrates.

Introduction

GSD7 was first described by Tarui et al. in 1965 in three Japanese siblings. The siblings were easily tired and were not able to keep pace with other people. They had muscle weakness and stiffness in muscles used in heavy exercise.

symptoms:
There are four types of GSD7:
Childhood (Classic) GSD7This is the most common form of GSD7 and usually begins in childhood with symptoms including:
Muscle weakness, pain and stiffness during exercise
Other symptoms can include:
NauseaVomitingDark, reddish brown-colored urine (myoglobinuria)Yellowing of the skin (jaundice)Low number of red blood cells (anemia)Large amount of glycogen in the muscleBreak down of muscle tissue (rhabdomyolysis)High amount of uric acid in the blood (hyperuricemia)
Symptoms usually go away after rest.
Infant GSD7This rare type of GSD7 occurs in babies. Symptoms include:
Loss of muscle tone (hypotonia)Muscle weakness (including in the heart, called cardiomyopathy)Breathing problems that can lead to death before age 1 yearCurving of the joints (arthrogryposis)Intellectual disability
Late-onset (adult) GSD7This form of GSD7 happens in adults who experience only muscle weakness and pain. They may have some muscle weakness and tiredness in childhood.
Hemolytic GSD7People with hemolytic GSD7 do not have muscle symptoms but have anemia due to break down of red blood cells.

