Glycogen Storage Disease Type I

synonyms:
glucose-6-phosphatase deficiencyglucose-6-phosphate transport defectglycogenosis type IGSDIVon Gierke disease

overview:
Glycogen storage diseases are a group of disorders in which stored glycogen cannot be metabolized into glucose to supply energy and to maintain steady blood glucose levels for the body. Type I glycogen storage disease is inherited as an autosomal recessive genetic disorder. Glycogen storage disease type I (GSDI) is characterized by accumulation of excessive glycogen and fat in the liver and kidneys that can result in an enlarged liver and kidneys and growth retardation leading to short stature. GSDI is associated with abnormalities (mutations) in theG6PCgene (GSDIA) orSLC37A4gene (GSDIB). These mutations result in enzyme deficiencies that block glycogen breakdown in affected organs causing excess amounts of glycogen and fat accumulation in the body tissues and low levels of circulating glucose in the blood. The enzyme deficiency also results in an imbalance or excessive accumulation of other metabolites, especially lactates, uric acid and fats like lipids and triglycerides.

symptoms:
The primary symptom of GSDI in infancy is a low blood sugar level (hypoglycemia). Symptoms of GSDI usually begin at three to four months of age and include enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly), kidney (nephromegaly), elevated levels of lactate, uric acid and lipids (both total lipids and triglycerides), and possible seizures caused due to repeated episodes of hypoglycemia. Continued low blood sugar can lead to delayed growth and development and muscle weakness. Affected children typically have doll-like faces with fat cheeks, relatively thin extremities, short stature, and protuberant abdomen.
High lipid levels can lead to the formation of fatty skin growths called xanthomas. Other conditions that can be associated with untreated GSD1 include; osteoporosis, delayed puberty, gout (arthritis caused by accumulation of uric acid), kidney disease, pulmonary hypertension (high blood pressure in the arteries that supply the lungs), hepatic adenoma (benign liver tumors), polycystic ovaries in females, an inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis), diarrhea and changes in brain function due to repeated episodes of hypoglycemia.
Impaired platelet function can lead to a bleeding tendency with frequent nose bleeds (epistaxis). In general GSD type Ib patients have similar clinical manifestations as type Ia patients, but in addition to the above mentioned manifestations, GSDIb is also associated with impaired neutrophil and monocyte function as well as chronic neutropenia after the first few years of life, all of which result in recurrent bacterial infections and oral and intestinal mucosal ulcers.
Early diagnosis and effective treatment can result in normal growth and puberty and many affected individuals live into adulthood and enjoy normal life activities. Many female patients have had successful pregnancies and childbirth.

