Glycogen Storage Disease Type VI

synonyms:
Hers diseaseliver phosphorylase deficiencyphosphorylase deficiency glycogen storage diseaseGDS6

overview:
Summary
Glycogen storage disease type VI (GSD6) is a genetic condition in which the liver cannot process sugar properly. The liver is responsible for breaking down a type of sugar called glycogen. Glycogen is a carbohydrate that is stored in the liver and muscle and used for energy. When the liver cannot break down glycogen properly, excess amounts accumulate in the liver and this causes a buildup that is damaging to the body.

Symptoms of the disease vary between individuals with GSD6. Most symptoms begin in infancy or childhood and include low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly) and an increased amount of lactic acid in the blood (lactic acidosis). These symptoms are likely to occur when an individual does not eat for a long time. Symptoms tend to improve as people with this disease get older. Some individuals with GSD6 may not require any treatment. Standard therapy includes eating several meals that are high in carbohydrates. Uncooked cornstarch can be used to quickly improve blood sugar levels.

GSD6 is caused by harmful changes (mutations) in thePYGLgene and this condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
Introduction
GSD6 is one of a group of several glycogen storage disorders that all impact the liver’s ability to process glycogen.
Glycogen storage disease type VI was originally called Hers disease when Henry-Gery Hers first described it in 1959. Hers reported three children with an enlarged liver, mild hypoglycemia, and increased glycogen content in the liver.

symptoms:
Symptoms vary from person to person, and people with GSD6 may not have all the symptoms listed. GSD6 is usually a relatively mild disorder, although rare cases with more severe symptoms have been reported.
Symptoms of GSD6 usually begin in infancy or childhood and may include an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly), low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) or an increase in the amount of lactic acid in the blood (lactic acidosis). Hypoglycemia can also cause symptoms such as faintness, weakness, hunger and nervousness. If present, hypoglycemia is usually mild and occurs more often during an illness. The symptoms of the disease are especially likely to occur when an individual does not eat for a long time.
Some children with GSD6 are shorter than average due to slow growth. They may also have muscle weakness (hypotonia). Intellectual development is usually normal. Although symptoms of GSD6 may not be present during childhood, it has been reported that liver enlargement can be noted, even if no other symptoms are present.
Many of the symptoms of GSD6 tend to improve as children get older, and most adults do not have symptoms. Liver enlargement often disappears by puberty and final adult height is often average. Muscle strength and tone are usually normal by adulthood as well. In untreated individuals, growth delays and weakening of the bone (osteoporosis) are common. People with GSD6 may be at an increased risk of having liver cancer or an enlarged heart (cardiomyopathy) in late childhood and adulthood.

