GNE Myopathy

synonyms:
hereditary Inclusion body myopathyHIBMh-IBMIBM2inclusion body myopathy, autosomal recessiveinclusion body myopathy, quadriceps-sparingQSMhereditary inclusion body myopathydistal myopathy with rimmed vacuolesDMRVNonaka myopathyrimmed vacuole myopathyquadriceps sparing myopathy

overview:
Summary
GNE myopathy, also known as HIBM, Nonaka myopathy, IBM2 and distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles, is a genetic disorder that affects primarily the skeletal muscles (muscles that the body uses to perform daily physical activity). First signs of the disease appear between 20 and 40 years of age and affect males and females at the same rate. This condition is characterized by progressive muscle weakness which typically worsens over time, decreased grip strength and frequent loss of balance.1,2
GNE myopathy is caused by changes (mutations) in theGNEgene, which encodes for an enzyme known as glucosamine (UDP-N-acetyl)-2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase. The enzyme is responsible for the production of sialic acid (SA), a sugar required by all cells including muscle to produce energy as well as an important component of cell membranes. The condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.3
Currently, there is no cure for the disease and treatment is focused on managing the symptoms. However, preclinical and clinical studies of several potential therapies are underway, including substrate replacement and gene therapy-based strategies.
Introduction
The term GNE myopathy refers to a group of diseases described worldwide by different investigators and physicians over the last few decades. In 1984, Nonaka et al. were the first to describe a rare muscle disorder predominantly affecting the anterior tibialis muscles and characterized by mild serum creatine kinase (CK) elevation and muscle atrophy. Under a microscope, muscle biopsies often showed characteristic histopathological changes including rimmed vacuoles, lack of inflammation, and no evidence of regeneration.4,5As such, they initially termed the disease distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles (DMRV) to describe a familial myopathy with onset in early adulthood. Reports followed by from Argov and Yarom describing a similar pathology found in Iranian Jewish families and characterized by autosomal recessive inheritance. In addition to showing the typical presence of rimmed vacuoles in muscle biopsies, these studies also suggested that the disease spared the quadriceps.3This led the group to name the condition hereditary inclusion body myopathy (HIBM).6Other historical names include Nonaka myopathy, inclusion body myopathy 2 (IBM2) and quadriceps sparing myopathy (QSM). Finally, the identification in the early 2000’s ofGNEgene mutations being responsible for these diseases has led to a grouping of the disorders under the same name now known and commonly referred to as GNE myopathy.7-9

symptoms:
GNE myopathy manifests between the second and third decade of life and is characterized by progressive muscle wasting often accompanied by severe incapacitation within 10 to 20 years after onset. Even at early stages of the disease, GNE myopathy patients exhibit a characteristic bilateral foot drop which is caused by weakness of the tibialis anterior muscle (one of the frontal muscles that is connected to the knee and the foot). Early stage muscle weakness in GNE myopathy patients can include disturbed gait and decreased stability, frequent falls, difficulty in climbing stairs, running and getting up from a seated position. Most patients end up wheelchair-bound within 10-20 years of disease onset. Lower limb muscles are affected first with the exception of the quadriceps which appears to be relatively spared. As the disease progresses, 5 to 10 years after the onset of symptoms, the majority of patients experience progressive weakness and loss of the upper limb muscles. In advanced stages of the disease, neck muscles can also be affected.1, 10, 11Ultimately, disease progression may result in complete loss of skeletal muscle function and dependence on caregivers1, 12, 13

