Gordon Syndrome

synonyms:
arthrogryposis multiplex congenita, distal, type IIAcamptodactyly-cleft palate-clubfootdistal arthrogryposis, type IIA

overview:
Summary
Gordon syndrome is an extremely rare disorder that belongs to a group of genetic disorders known as the distal arthrogryposes. These disorders typically involve stiffness and impaired mobility of certain joints of the lower arms and legs (distal extremities) including the knees, elbows, wrists, and/or ankles. These joints tend to be permanently fixed in a bent (flexed) or straightened (extended) position (contractures). Gordon syndrome is characterized by the permanent fixation of several fingers in a bent position (camptodactyly), abnormal bending inward of the foot (clubfoot or talipes), and, less frequently, incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate). In some individuals, additional abnormalities may also be present. The range and severity of symptoms may vary from one person to another. Intelligence is not affected. Gordon syndrome is caused by alterations (mutations) in thePIEZO2gene and is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait.

symptoms:
Gordon syndrome is characterized by stiffness and impaired mobility of certain joints of the arms and legs (distal arthrogryposis) including the knees, elbows, wrists, and/or ankles. In most infants with this disorder, several fingers may be permanently fixed in a flexed position (camptodactyly), which may result in limitations in range of motion and manual dexterity. In addition, affected infants may exhibit abnormal bending inward of the foot (clubfoot or talipes). In severe instances, infants with Gordon syndrome may experience delays in walking.
Approximately 20-30 percent of affected infants also exhibit incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate). Severe malformation of the palate may lead to difficulty in speaking. In addition, in some people, a soft-tissue structure at the back of the throat (uvula) may be abnormally split (bifid).
In some affected individuals, additional findings have occurred in association with Gordon syndrome and may, in fact, be part of the syndrome. Such additional findings may include short stature, dislocation of the hip, abnormal backward curvature of the upper spine (lordosis), and/or abnormal front-to-back and side-to-side curvature of the spine (kyphoscoliosis). In addition, some affected individuals may exhibit drooping of the eyelids (ptosis); an extra fold of skin on either side of the nose that may cover the eyes’ inner corners (epicanthal folds); mild webbing of the fingers and/or toes (syndactyly); abnormal skin ridge patterns on the hands and feet (dermatoglyphics); and/or a short, webbed neck (pterygium colli). In some males, one or both of the testes may fail to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism). Cognitive development of affected individuals is normal.

