Gorham-Stout Disease

synonyms:
disappearing bone diseaseessential osteolysisGorham’s syndromeGorham-Stout syndromeidiopathic massive osteolysismassive Gorham osteolysismassive osteolysisMorbus Gorham-Stout diseasephantom bone diseaseprogressive massive osteolysisvanishing one disease

overview:
Summary
Gorham-Stout disease (GSD), which is also known as vanishing bone disease, disappearing bone disease, massive osteolysis, and more than a half-dozen other terms in the medical literature, is a rare bone disorder characterized by progressive bone loss (osteolysis) and the overgrowth (proliferation) of lymphatic vessels. Affected individuals experience progressive destruction and resorption of bone. Multiple bones may become involved. Areas commonly affected by GSD include the ribs, spine, pelvis, skull, collarbone (clavicle), and jaw. Pain and swelling in the affected area may occur. Bones affected by GSD are prone to reduced bone mass (osteopenia) and fracture. The severity of GSD can vary from one person to another and the disorder can potentially cause disfigurement and functional disability of affected areas. The exact cause of GSD is unknown.
Introduction
The lymphatic system consists of a network of tubular channels (lymph vessels) that transport lymph back into the bloodstream. Lymph is fluid that contains proteins, fats, and lymphocytes. As lymph moves through the lymphatic system, it passes through a network of lymph nodes that help the body to deactivate sources of infection (e.g., viruses, bacteria, etc.) and other potentially injurious substances and toxins. Groups of lymph nodes are located throughout the body, including in the neck, under the arms (axillae), at the elbows, and in the chest, abdomen, and groin. The lymphatic system also includes the spleen, which filters worn-out red blood cells and produces lymphocytes; and bone marrow, which is the spongy tissue inside the cavities of bones that manufactures blood cells. GSD is a rare disease that is thought to be caused by an error in the development of the lymphatic system. In individuals with GSD, bones become infiltrated with lymphatic vessels and are broken down and replaced by a fibrous band of connective tissue.

symptoms:
The symptoms of GSD depend upon the specific bones involved. The ribs, spine, pelvis, skull, collarbone (clavicle), and jaw are the most commonly affect bones in GSD. In some cases, affected individuals may rapidly develop pain and swelling in the affected area. In other cases, affected individuals may experience a dull pain or ache or generalized weakness that builds over time. Trauma is often a trigger of the initial presentation of the disease. Bones affected by GSD are prone to pathological fractures.
When GSD affects the maxillofacial area, pain, loose teeth, fractures and facial deformity may develop.
Involvement of the spine or skull base can be associated with neurological complications. Involvement of the spine can also potentially result in chronic or acute pain or paralysis (paraplegia). Some medical references have reported an association with meningitis in such cases. Meningitis is inflammation of the membranes (meninges) covering the brain and spinal cord, usually due to infection.
Involvement of the thoracic cage can lead to chylothorax, which is the accumulation of chyle in the space between the membranes (pleura) that line the lungs and chest cavity. Chyle is a milky fluid that consists of lymph and fat. Chylothorax can cause difficulty breathing (dyspnea), rapid breathing (tachypnea), chest pain or respiratory compromise. Chylothorax can eventually progress to cause life-threatening respiratory complications. Chylous ascites (accumulation of chyle in the abdominal cavity) can also occur in patients with GSD.
Some individuals with GSD may develop abnormal fluid accumulation around the heart (pericardial effusion). Specifically, the fluid accumulates in the pericardium, the sac-like structure that surrounds the heart.
Clinical Course – OutcomesThe prognosis for GSD patients is uncertain and variable and depends on the extent of the disease, the part of the body involved, and underlying proliferative progressiveness of the disease. Pulmonary involvement with chylothorax or spinal involvement may confer a poor prognosis, sometimes leading to death. In other cases, lesions may remain stable for long periods of time.

