Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss Syndrome

synonyms:
Craniofacial Dysostosis-PD Arteriosus-Hypertrichosis-Hypoplasia of LabiaCraniosynostosis-Hypertrichosis-Facial and Other AnomaliesGCM Syndrome

overview:
Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome is an extremely rare inherited disorder characterized by premature closure of the fibrous joints (sutures) between certain bones in the skull (craniosynostosis), unusually small eyes (microphthalmia), absence of some teeth (hypodontia), and/or excessive amounts of hair (hypertrichosis) on most areas of the body. Affected individuals may also exhibit a mild delay in physical development (growth retardation); short fingers and/or toes; and/or underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the two long folds of skin on either side of the vaginal opening (labia majora) in females. In addition, there may be an abnormal opening between the two large blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart (pulmonary artery and aorta), causing inappropriate recirculation of some blood through the lungs, rather than throughout the rest of the body (patent ductus arteriosus). In some cases, mild mental retardation may also be present. It is believed that Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome may be inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.

symptoms:
Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome is characterized by a mild delay in physical development (growth retardation), short stature, mild mental retardation, and several physical abnormalities.
In Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome, premature closure of the fibrous joints (coronal sutures) between bones in the front (frontal bone) and sides (parietal bones) of the skull (craniosynostosis) may cause the head to appear abnormally short (brachycephaly). In addition, the middle portion of the face may be underdeveloped (midface hypoplasia), causing these areas (e.g., forehead, nose, and/or chin) to appear flat. Additional abnormalities of the head and facial (craniofacial) area may also be present, such as unusually small eyes (microphthalmia); downwardly slanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures); incomplete development of the bones in the jaw (maxillary hypoplasia); and/or an abnormally narrow, highly arched roof of the mouth (palate). Individuals with Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome may also have several abnormalities of the teeth. Some teeth may be absent (hypodontia), unusually small (microdontia), and/or abnormally shaped. Teeth may also be improperly positioned (malocclusion), causing difficulties in chewing (mastication). With time, some affected individuals may exhibit a thickening or coarsening of facial features.
Infants with Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome often exhibit several abnormalities involving the hair. The hairline may be abnormally low on the scalp (low frontal hairline) and the hair may be unusually coarse. In addition, affected infants may have excessive amounts of hair (hypertrichosis) on most areas of the body including the face, scalp, hands, feet, arms, and/or legs.
Affected individuals often have numerous skeletal abnormalities such as underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the bones at the end of the fingers and toes (distal phalanges) and/or the bones between the wrist and the fingers (metacarpals). As a result, the hands, fingers, and toes may appear abnormally short.
Many individuals with Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome also exhibit additional malformations. In affected females, the two long folds of skin on either side of the vaginal opening may be underdeveloped (labia majora hypoplasia). In addition, in some cases, there may be an abnormal opening between two large blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart (pulmonary artery and aorta); as a result, some blood may recirculate through the lungs, rather than throughout the rest of the body (patent ductus arteriosus). If a large amount of blood is misdirected to the lungs, the heart may become strained as it works to pump sufficient amounts of blood to the rest of the body. Affected infants may therefore exhibit an increased heart rate (tachycardia), enlargement of the heart (cardiomegaly), shortness of breath, and/or a failure to gain weight. They may also have an increased susceptibility to respiratory infections and/or bacterial infections causing inflammation of the heart’s lining (bacterial endocarditis), and in some cases, a reduction in the heart’s ability to pump blood efficiently (congestive heart failure).
In some infants with Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome, portions of the intestine may protrude through an abnormal opening in the abdominal wall where the umbilical cord joined the fetus’ abdomen (umbilical hernia). In addition, in some affected individuals, sound may be inappropriately conducted through the external or middle ear to the inner ear; as a result, there may be a decreased sensitivity to sound (conductive hearing loss).

