Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis

synonyms:
GPAmidline granulomatosisnecrotizing respiratory granulomatosisgranulomatosisWegener’s disease (former)Wegener granulomatosis (former)Wegener’s granulomatosis (former)

overview:
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) is a rare disorder characterized by inflammation of small- and medium-sized blood vessels (vasculitis) that results in damage to various organ systems of the body, most often the respiratory tract and kidneys. Symptoms may include ulcerations of the mucous membranes in the nose with secondary bacterial infection, a persistent runny nose, sinus pain, and chronic middle ear infection (otitis media) potentially resulting in hearing loss. In some individuals, kidney abnormalities may progress to kidney failure, a serious complication that requires dialysis or a kidney transplant. If the lungs are affected, a cough, coughing up of blood (hemoptysis), and inflammation of the thin membrane lining the outside of the lungs and the tissues inside of the lung may be present. Other symptoms can occur depending on which organ systems are affected in an individual.
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis is not an inherited disorder. It is classified as an autoimmune disorder. Autoimmune disorders occur when the body’s immune system mistakenly attacks healthy tissue. Environmental, infectious and some genetic factors may play a role in the development of the disorder, including cigarette smoking. The disorder can occur at any age, but most often affects people between 40 and 60 years of age. For many years, granulomatosis with polyangiitis was known as Wegener’s granulomatosis or Wegener granulomatosis. Wegener is the surname of a physician who was one of the first to describe the disorder in detail in the medical literature back in the 1930s. Other doctors before Wegener also described the disease. Surnames don’t characterize diseases and terms which better describe diseases are generally preferred. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis is classified as a form of vasculitis, and further classified as a form of antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies-associated (ANCA-associated) vasculitis or ANCA-associated vasculitides (AAV).

symptoms:
The specific symptoms and severity of the symptoms associated with granulomatosis with polyangiitis vary greatly from one person to another. Indeed, granulomatosis with polyangiitis has been described affecting almost all organ systems of the body.
In most people, the disorder affects the respiratory tract and the kidneys. Some people may have mild disease, while others develop life-threatening complications. The disorder can develop slowly over many months or it can develop rapidly over several days (acute). Because each person with granulomatosis with polyangiitis is unique, and the symptoms described below may or may not apply to a specific individual.
Initial symptoms usually occur in the upper respiratory tract and resemble those associated with a severe common cold, including a persistent runny nose (rhinorrhea), nasal crusting and nasal obstruction or congestion. More serious symptoms include nosebleeds, ulcerations of the mucous membranes in the nose with secondary bacterial infection, sinus pain, inflammation of the sinuses (paranasal sinusitis), and hoarseness. Some affected individuals will develop a hole or tear in the wall (septum) dividing the nostrils, resulting in the collapse of the bridge of the nose, a condition called saddle nose. Affected individuals may also develop recurrent middle ear inflammation (otitis media), which, if untreated, may eventually result in hearing loss.
Additional initial symptoms can include fever, general feeling of ill health (malaise), weakness and fatigue, joint pain (arthralgia), loss of appetite, and unintended weight loss. Sometimes, the upper airways are affected for years before other symptoms develop and, sometimes, granulomatosis with polyangiitis remains isolated in the upper airways and the rest of the body remains unaffected. This may be called localized or limited granulomatosis with polyangiitis.
Many affected individuals will develop symptoms affecting the lungs (pulmonary). These symptoms include a persistent cough, episodes of coughing up of blood (hemoptysis), difficulty breathing (dyspnea), chest pain, inflammation of the thin membrane lining the outside of the lungs and the inside of the lungs (pleuritis), excess buildup of fluid around the lungs (pleural effusion), and inflammation of the lung tissues themselves. There may be substances such as blood, pus or protein (pulmonary infiltrates) in lung tissue that can be detected on x-ray examination. Sometimes, affected individuals experience inflammation and narrowing of the area of the windpipe below the vocal cords (subglottis), a condition known as subglottic stenosis. Inflammation and narrowing of the whole windpipe (tracheal stenosis) can also occur. These conditions can cause difficulty breathing, high-pitched noisy breathing (stridor), wheezing, or voice changes. Bleeding (hemorrhaging) in the lungs is a potential serious complication that requires hospitalization and aggressive treatment. Respiratory symptoms are often the first sign in children with this disorder.
Approximately 75% of individuals eventually develop kidney (renal) disease. However, in many people, no symptoms are apparent (asymptomatic). Affected individuals may develop high blood pressure (hypertension) and fluid retention in the legs. These symptoms are caused by inflammation of the cluster of blood vessels and nerve fibers of the kidney called the glomeruli, which filter the blood. Glomeruli become swollen and misshapen and cannot perform their proper function, a condition known as glomerulonephritis. This can lead to small amounts of blood but great loss of protein in the urine. Without treatment, progressive kidney damage can occur, eventually causing life-threatening kidney (renal) failure.
Most individuals experience symptoms affecting the muscles and skeleton, including pain in various joints (polyarthralgia), inflammation and swelling of the joints (arthritis), inflammation of muscles (myositis), and muscle pain (myalgia).
More than half of individuals with granulomatosis with polyangiitis experience eye (ocular) abnormalities, including inflammation of the delicate membrane that lines the eyes (conjunctivitis), corneal ulcerations, inflammation of the white, outer-covering (sclera) of the eyeball (scleritis), and inflammation of the membrane covering the sclera (episcleritis). Affected individuals may also develop an abnormal mass or sore behind the eye (orbital mass lesion or ‘pseudotumor’). Eye abnormalities may result in eye pain, redness, bulging or protrusion of the eyeballs (proptosis), double vision (diplopia), and vision loss. Additional findings can occur in some people. Sometimes, problems with the eyes are the first symptom of granulomatosis with polyangiitis.
Approximately half of affected individuals develop skin abnormalities including small raised bumps (papules), slightly larger, deeper bumps just below the surface of the skin (subcutaneous nodules), skin ulcers, bleeding (hemorrhage) within skin layers, causing the appearance of small purplish spots on the skin (petechiae), and/or areas of purple discoloration caused by bleeding vessels near the surface of the skin (purpura). Skin lesions may or may not be painful. Some affected individuals may have painfully cold fingers and toes in response to cold (Raynaud’s phenomenon) caused by lack of blood flow to these areas. Sometimes, this is severe enough to cause tissue death (gangrene) of the tips of the fingers and toes.
In rare instances, individuals may also develop neurological abnormalities including inflammation and degeneration of nerve fibers outside of the brain and spinal cord (peripheral neuropathy), injury to a few peripheral nerves in different areas simultaneously (mononeuritis multiplex), and inflammation of cranial nerves (cranial neuritis). Peripheral neuropathy can cause a sensation of numbness, burning or tingling in the hands or feet. Mononeuritis multiplex can cause pain, weakness and abnormal sensations in the affected areas. The specific symptoms depend on which areas of the body are affected. Symptoms of cranial nerve involvement depend on which cranial nerves are affected. Headaches, seizures, and paralysis on one side of the body (hemiplegia) have also been reported.
Other rare symptoms include abnormalities of the heart (cardiac) including inflammation of the membranous sac that surrounds the heart (pericarditis), inflammation of the endocardium (endocarditis), which is the inner membrane lining of the heart, inflammation of the arteries that supply blood to the heart muscles (coronary arteritis), and disease of the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy). Some affected individuals may be at an increased risk of having a stroke or heart attack (myocardial infarction).

