Graves’ Disease

synonyms:
Basedow diseaseexophthalmic goiterGraves' hyperthyroidismParry diseasetoxic diffuse goiter

overview:
Graves’ disease is a disease affecting the thyroid and often the skin and eyes. The thyroid is a gland and is part of the endocrine system, the network of glands that secrete hormones that regulate the chemical processes (metabolism) that influence the body’s activities as well as regulating the heart rate, body temperature, and blood pressure. Hormones are secreted directly into the bloodstream where they travel to various areas of the body. Graves’ disease is characterized by abnormal enlargement of the thyroid (goiter) and increased secretion of thyroid hormone (hyperthyroidism). Thyroid hormones are involved with many different systems of the body and, consequently, the specific symptoms and signs of Graves’ disease can vary widely from one person to another. Common symptoms include unintended weight loss, an abnormal intolerance of heat, muscle weakness, fatigue and protrusion or bulging of the eyeballs from their sockets. Graves’ disease is an autoimmune disease.

symptoms:
Onset of the symptoms associated with Graves’ disease is usually gradual, often taking several weeks or months to develop. Symptoms may include behavioral changes such as nervousness, irritability, anxiousness, restlessness and difficulty sleeping (insomnia). Additional symptoms include unintended weight loss, muscle weakness, an abnormal intolerance to heat, increased sweating, a rapid, irregular heartbeat (tachycardia) and fatigue
Graves’ disease is often associated with abnormalities affecting the eyes often referred to as Graves’ ophthalmopathy. While mild ophthalmopathy is present in the majority of people who have Graves’ hyperthyroidism at some point in their lives, less than 10% have significant eye involvement that requires therapy. Eye symptoms can develop before, at the same time or after the development of hyperthyroidism. In rare instances, individuals with eye symptoms never develop hyperthyroidism. In some instances, Graves’ ophthalmopathy may first become apparent or may worsen following treatment for Graves’ hyperthyroidism.
Graves’ ophthalmopathy is highly variable. In some individuals it may remain the same for many years, while in other individuals it may improve or worsen. It can also follow a pattern of worsening (exacerbations) and then going improving greatly (remission). Most individuals have mild disease with no progression.
Common eye abnormalities include swelling of the tissues surrounding the eye that may cause the eye to protrude or bulge out of its protective socket (orbit), a condition referred to as proptosis. Affected individuals may also experience dry eyes, puffy eyelids, eyelid retraction, inflammation, redness, pain, and irritation of the eyes. Some individuals describe a gritty sensation in the eyes. Less often, blurred or double vision, sensitivity to light, and/or diminished vision may also occur.
Very rarely, individuals with Graves’ disease develop a skin condition known as pretibial dermopathy or myxedema. This condition is characterized by the development of thickened, reddish skin on the front of shins. It is usually limited to the shins but, sometimes, may also occur on the feet. Rarely, soft-tissue swelling of the hands and clubbing of the fingers and toes (acropachy).
Additional symptoms associated with Graves’ disease include heart palpitations, slight tremors of the hands and/or fingers, hair loss, brittle nails, exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia), increased appetite, and an increase in the frequency of bowel movements. Females with Graves’ disease may experience an alteration in the menstrual cycle. Males may experience erectile dysfunction. In some instances, Graves’ disease may progress to cause congestive heart failure or abnormal thinning and weakness of the bones (osteoporosis) that leaves them brittle and susceptible to repeated fractures.

