Greig Cephalopolysyndactyly Syndrome

synonyms:
GCPSGreig syndromecephalopolysyndactyly syndromepolysyndactyly-dysmorphic craniofacies, Greig typefrontodigital syndrome (obsolete)Hootnick-Holmes syndrome (obsolete)

overview:
Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by physical abnormalities affecting the fingers and toes (digits) and the head and facial (craniofacial) area. Characteristic digital features may include extra (supernumerary) fingers and/or toes (polydactyly), webbing and/or fusion of the fingers and/or toes (cutaneous or osseous syndactyly), and/or additional abnormalities. Craniofacial malformations associated with this disorder may include a large and/or unusually shaped skull; metopic synostosis; a high, prominent forehead (frontal bossing); an abnormally broad nasal bridge; widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); and/or other physical abnormalities. The range and severity of symptoms may vary greatly among affected individuals. In most individuals, GCPS is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.

symptoms:
GCPS, a rare genetic disorder that is present at birth (congenital), is characterized by abnormalities of the fingers and toes (digits) and the head and facial (craniofacial) area. The range and severity of symptoms vary from individual to individual, with the facial characteristics, in particular, being quite subtle in some individuals.
Infants with this disorder exhibit various digital malformations, including extra (supernumerary) fingers and/or toes (polydactyly); webbing or fusion of the fingers and/or toes (cutaneous or osseous syndactyly); abnormally wide thumbs and/or great toes (halluces); and/or split (bifid) end bones of the thumbs and/or halluces (terminal phalanges). Affected infants with supernumerary digits will usually have the additional digit(s) toward the “pinky finger” side of the hand (postaxial polydactyly) and the “big toe” side of the foot (preaxial polydactyly). The extra digit can be a complete digit or a non-functional incomplete digit. The degree of digital fusion may also vary from the skin only joining part of the distance to the fingertip to the skin being joined all the way to the tip of the finger. In some cases, only the soft tissue is fused, but in others, the bone or boney cartilage may be fused.
Affected infants can also have craniofacial malformations including an abnormally large head (macrocephaly); a high, prominent or protruding forehead (frontal bossing); high anterior hairline; a broad nasal bridge; and/or widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism). In some cases, the fibrous joints (sutures) between certain bones in the skull may be abnormally wide and may close unusually late in development; on the other hand, in rare individuals, certain cranial sutures may close prematurely (craniosynostosis). Such irregular closure of the sutures may cause the head to appear unusually shaped (scaphocephaly, trigonencephaly, or plagiocephaly).
In many individuals with GCPS, additional abnormalities may be present. These may include permanently flexed fingers (camptodactyly), dislocation of the hip, protrusion of a portion of the large intestine through an abnormal opening in the muscular wall that lines the lower abdominal cavity (inguinal hernia), and/or other physical abnormalities. Rarely (less than 10% of affected individuals), it can include developmental delays, intellectual disability, seizure, build-up of fluid inside the skull (hydrocephalus), and abnormalities affecting the nerve fibers (corpus callosum) that connect the two cerebral hemispheres of the brain may be present. In most individuals with the severe form of the disorder, it is caused by a deletion of the entireGLI3gene. The larger the deletion, the more likely the individual will show these uncommon symptoms, because larger deletions can affect other genes in addition toGLI3.

