Growth Hormone Insensitivity

synonyms:
GHIGH insensitivitygrowth hormone resistancegrowth hormone unresponsivenessLaron syndrome

overview:
Summary
Growth hormone insensitivity (GHI) is a group of extremely rare genetic disorders in which the body is unable to use the growth hormone that it produces. GHI can be caused by mutations in the growth hormone receptor (GHR) gene or mutations in genes involved in the action pathway within the cell after growth hormone binds to its receptor, preventing production of insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1), the substance responsible for the growth effects of growth hormone. Even more rarely, children with a GH gene deletion who have been treated with recombinant GH develop antibodies that block GH binding to its receptor. Affected children fail to grow normally.
Children with GHRD who are treated with IGF-1 before puberty have improved growth, but, unlike children with GH deficiency given recombinant GH treatment, they do not have normal growth restored. Treatment for these conditions is only effective while the growing bones are still open, i.e. before the completion of adolescence. IGF-I insensitivity due to IGF-I receptor mutation mimics GHI, but results in less severe growth deficiency and is somewhat responsive to treatment with recombinant GH.
GHI is characterized by short stature and delayed bone age, as well as normal or high levels of circulating GH. Other common symptoms are delayed onset of puberty, prominent forehead, low blood sugar in infancy and early childhood, and obesity in adulthood. Except for an extremely rare form of GHI, where the gene for IGF-I is defective, brain development is normal, apparently because IGF-I can be made during fetal life without GH stimulation in the other conditions. Some, but definitely not all, patients with the less rare condition of IGF-I receptor deficiency may have mild intellectual impairment.
Introduction
Laron and colleagues in Israel, first reported GHRD in 1966, based on observations that began in 1958, and have continued to the present. The molecular basis for the syndrome they described, a mutation of theGHRgene in some of the Israeli patients was initially described in 1989, and since then over 60 different mutations in the gene for this protein has been identified by many investigators. Mutations in genes in the action pathway of GH after it’s binding to theGHRand associated with varying effects of IGF-I deficiency have been described in the past 15 years.

symptoms:
There is a wide range of effects depending on the gene mutations involved (see Causes section). The very few individuals withIGF-Igene mutation have severe intellectual disability and intrauterine growth failure, with deafness and micrognathia. GHRD results in severe growth failure without deleterious effects on intrauterine growth or brain development, and the mutation ofSTAT5b, responsible for an important activator protein, has similar growth effects but is also associated with severe impairment of immunocompetence. TheIGFALSmutation, affecting an important stabilizing component of the circulating IGF-I, while associated with very low circulating IGF levels, has only modest effects on growth.
GHI is characterized by severe but proportionate short stature as a result of growth failure that begins at birth. Along with growth retardation, there are delays in tooth eruption. There is also disproportion between the growth of the skull and face, a saddle nose and deep-set eyes. Sexual development is moderately delayed in both genders. In females with these disorders, the onset of menses usually takes place between 16 to 19 years of age. Hands and feet are smaller than normal, in proportion to overall body size. A high-pitched voice may also be present and obesity is common in the adults, especially women.
High circulating levels of GH are found in the children but may not be obvious without stimulation tests in the adults. A high percentage of young patients have low blood sugar levels (hypoglycemia) that can be associated with seizures in some very young children. Recently, researchers have found that a population of individuals with GHRD in Ecuador (where approximately 1/3 of the world’s population of GHRD has been identified) had absence of cancer and diabetes with molecular evidence of protection from aging changes in their DNA. This may be due to a protective effect from the low IGF-I levels, and in the case of absence of diabetes despite obesity, due to absence of counter-regulation effects of GH.

