Guillain-Barré Syndrome

synonyms:
acute polyneuritisacute inflammatory neuropathyacute inflammatory polyneuropathyGBS

overview:
Introduction
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is a rare, rapidly progressive disease due to inflammation of the nerves causing muscle weakness, sometimes progressing to complete paralysis. GBS affects about one or two people each year in every 100,000 population. Its exact cause is unknown. About half the people with the disease have a gastrointestinal or respiratory infection a few days before the onset. According to strong evidence, the infection produces an immune response which damages the nerve fibers causing weakness and loss of sensation. In milder disease, the damage only affects the sheaths of the nerve fibers (like the coating round an electric wire). This blocks the transmission of nerve impulses. These patients can recover completely in a few weeks. In more severe disease, the immune response damages the conducting cores of the nerve fibers (like the electric wires themselves). It takes longer for these patients to get better and may cause permanent weakness.

symptoms:
Weakness usually begins in the legs and spreads to the arms and body. Sometimes it spreads to the face, throat and breathing muscles. In up to a quarter of people with GBS, the breathing muscles become so weak that a breathing machine (respirator) is needed. Tingling feelings, pins and needles, and numbness (loss of feeling) are common. These are due to damage to the sensory nerves that signal feeling from the skin and joints. The abnormal feelings are usually worst in the feet and hands. The tingling may be painful, and the muscles may hurt. The symptoms usually worsen for the first two weeks, but progression may last as little as one day or as long as four weeks. Symptoms usually affect both sides of the body equally.
Most people only have symptoms in their arms and legs but severely affected people have more serious symptoms. They may have difficulty swallowing and become breathless. They may become unable to empty their bladder and bowel. Their pulse may go too fast or too slow and the blood pressure may rise too high or fall too low. Modern medical and nursing care can cope with all these problems.
Symptoms vary widely. Some people only develop mild weakness not affecting walking and lasting only a few weeks. Others become completely paralyzed so that they cannot even move their eyes. Improvement typically starts days to several weeks after the worst has been reached and people go on improving for several months. About 20% of patients still have disability for more than a year, for instance needing aids to walk. In people left with severe weakness, slow improvement continues for two or more years.

