Hailey-Hailey Disease

synonyms:
benign chronic familial pemphigusbenign chronic pemphigusfamilial benign pemphigusHHD

overview:
Summary
Hailey-Hailey disease is a rare genetic disorder that is characterized by blisters and erosions most often affecting the neck, armpits, skin folds and genitals. The lesions may come and go and usually heal without scarring. Sunlight, heat, sweating and friction often aggravate the disorder. The symptoms of Hailey-Hailey disease occur because of the failure of skin cells to stick together resulting in the breakdown of affected skin layers. Hailey-Hailey disease occurs due to a change (variant or mutation) in theATP2C1gene. This gene creates a protein essential for the proper health of skin. The disorder becomes apparent after puberty, usually by the third or fourth decade, but symptoms can develop at any age.

Introduction
Hailey-Hailey disease is also known as familial benign pemphigus, which has created significant confusion in the medical literature. Pemphigus is a general term for a group of rare autoimmune blistering skin disorders. The symptoms and skin damage of pemphigus and Hailey-Hailey disease are similar. However, pemphigus is an autoimmune disorder, a disorder that occurs when the body’s own immune system mistakenly attacks healthy tissue. Hailey-Hailey disease is not an autoimmune disorder and there are no autoantibodies. Hailey-Hailey disease is a distinct genetic disorder caused by anATP2C1gene variant. Hailey-Hailey disease was first described in the medical literature in 1939.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of Hailey-Hailey disease varies from one person to another, even among members of the same family. In most cases, there is a family history of the disorder.
Hailey-Hailey usually first appears as an erosive, blistering skin rash, most often affecting the armpits, neck, chest and groin. The lesions may develop a yellow crusty overlying layer. In many people, the rash may itch or cause a burning sensation. The lesions can separate leaving painful, cracked skin. Secondary infection of the skin lesions can also occur and may cause an unpleasant odor.
The skin lesions that characterize Hailey-Hailey disease are generally relapsing and remitting, which means that they go away on their own but recur periodically. The length of an outbreak and the time between the lesions going away and a recurrence varies. When the lesions heal, they generally do not leave scars. The skin lesions are worsened by friction, heat, injury and sun exposure.

