Haim-Munk Syndrome

synonyms:
Cochin Jewish DisorderHMSKera. Palmoplant. Con., Pes Planus, Ony., Periodon., Arach., AcroosteolysisKeratosis Palmoplantaris with Periodontopathia and Onychogryposis

overview:
Haim-Munk syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by the development of red, scaly thickened patches of skin on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet (palmoplantar hyperkeratosis), frequent pus-producing (pyogenic) skin infections, overgrowth (hypertrophy) of the fingernails and toenails (onychogryposis), and degeneration of the structures that surround and support the teeth (periodontosis). Periodontosis usually results in the premature loss of teeth. Additional features associated with the disorder may include flat feet (pes planus); abnormally long, slender fingers and toes (arachnodactyly); loss of bone tissue at the ends of the fingers and/or toes (acroosteolysis); and/or other physical findings. Haim-Munk syndrome is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.

symptoms:
Haim-Munk syndrome is a rare inherited disorder characterized by the development of dry scaly patches of skin that are abnormally red and thickened on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet (palmoplantar hyperkeratosis). Such patches may appear around the age of one to five years. However, in some cases, hyperkeratosis may be present at birth (congenital). These reddened patches are usually confined to the undersides of the hands and feet, but may eventually spread to the knees and elbows. In some rare cases, the upper portions of the hands and feet, the eyelids, the lips, and the cheeks may also be affected. Affected individuals also may have frequently recurring, pus-producing (pyogenic) skin infections.
In individuals with Haim-Munk syndrome, the teeth usually appear to form and erupt normally. However, most affected individuals develop chronic severe inflammation and degeneration of the tissues that surround and support the teeth (gingivitis and periodontosis). The gums and the underlying ligaments and bones that support the teeth are usually involved. When the primary (deciduous) teeth erupt, the gums become red, swell, and bleed (gingivitis). The mouth may become inflamed (stomatitis), lymph nodes may swell (regional adenopathy), and abnormal “tissue pockets” may form in the gums causing susceptibility to recurring bacterial infections. By the age of five years, the deciduous teeth often may become loose and fall out. Without appropriate treatment, most of the permanent teeth may be lost in the same manner by the age of approximately 16 years. Both deciduous and permanent teeth are usually affected in the order of their eruption.
In most cases, individuals with Haim-Munk syndrome exhibit overgrowth (hypertrophy) of the fingernails and toenails causing them to become abnormally thick to appear hooked and curved inward. Most affected individuals may also have flat feet (pes planus) and/or abnormally long, slender fingers and toes (arachnodactyly).
In addition, some individuals with Haim-Munk syndrome also experience numbness or tingling due to a lack of normal blood flow to the fingers and/or toes when exposed to cold temperatures (Raynaud’s phenomenon). Bone tissue at the ends of the fingers and/or toes (acroosteolysis) may become frail and degrade in some cases. These findings (i.e., involving the nails, hands, and feet) may be helpful in distinguishing this disorder from Papillon-Lefevre syndrome.
In one reported cases, an individuals with Haim-Munk syndrome develop destructive inflammation of the joints (arthritis) of the wrists and shoulders.

