Hallermann-Streiff Syndrome

synonyms:
Francois dyscephaly syndromeHallermann-Streiff-Francois syndromeHSSoculomandibulodyscephaly with hypotrichosisoculomandibulofacial syndrome

overview:
Summary

Hallermann-Streiff syndrome (HSS) is a rare disorder that is primarily characterized by distinctive malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region; sparse hair (hypotrichosis); eye abnormalities; dental defects; degenerative skin changes (atrophy), particularly in the scalp and nasal regions; and proportionate short stature. Characteristic craniofacial features include a short, broad head (brachycephaly) with an unusually prominent forehead and/or sides of the skull (dyscephaly); a small, underdeveloped lower jaw (hypoplastic mandible); a narrow, highly arched roof of the mouth (palate); and a thin, pinched, tapering nose. Many affected individuals also have clouding of the lenses of the eyes at birth (congenital cataracts or corneal stromal opacities); unusually small eyes (microphthalmia); and/or other ocular abnormalities (glaucoma, retinal detachments). Dental defects may include natal or neonatal teeth, delayed tooth eruption, enamel hypoplasia, absent permanent teeth (hypodontia or partial adontia), abnormal tooth development resulting in short roots and early loss of teeth, and/or improper alignment of teeth. In almost all cases, HSS has appeared to occur randomly for unknown reasons (sporadically), and this syndrome is thought to be the result of a new change to genetic material (mutation).

Introduction

Hallermann-Streiff syndrome was first described in the medical literature in 1893. The disorder was named for two eye doctors who later independently reported cases of the syndrome, recognizing it as a distinct disease entity.

symptoms:
Associated symptoms and signs vary greatly in range and severity from case to case. The principal features of Hallermann-Streiff syndrome include abnormalities of the skull (cranium) and certain bones of the face (known as dyscephaly); distinctive facial features; ocular defects; dental anomalies; and/or proportionate short stature. In many cases, additional abnormalities are also present.
Many affected infants have an unusually shaped skull, with abnormal shortness of the head (brachycephaly) and prominence of the forehead and/or sides of the skull (frontal and/or parietal bossing). In some cases, the head may also be relatively small (microcephaly) and the cheekbones may be underdeveloped (malar hypoplasia). In addition, there is typically abnormal widening of the fibrous joints (sutures) between certain bones of the skull and delayed closure of the two “soft spots” (fontanelles) at the front and back of the cranium.
Affected individuals also often have a disproportionately small face; a high, narrow roof of the mouth (palate); and/or a small lower jaw (micrognathia) with receding chin (retrognathia). The nose is typically quite narrow and pointed; with a narrow nasal bridge, small nostrils and underdeveloped nasal cartilage that tends to become more convex (beaked) with age. The underdevelopment of the jaw and nose may result in upper airway obstruction and breathing difficulties in young children. In addition, many people with this syndrome have very sparse hair (hypotrichosis), particularly of the scalp, eyelashes, eyebrows, beard, pubic hair, and hair under the arms. Degenerative skin changes (atrophy) are also often present and largely limited to the scalp and nose. Due to such changes, the skin in these regions may appear unusually taut and thin, and regional blood vessels may seem unusually pronounced. Nasal lipofilling has been used to treat the atrophy of the nasal skin, resulting in improvement in nasal skin color and texture.
The craniofacial abnormalities associated with the disorder, such as small nostrils and glossoptosis, can cause obstruction of the upper airway, particularly during the newborn period and infancy. Glossoptosis refers to downward displacement or retraction of the tongue that may occur secondary to abnormal smallness of the lower jaw (micrognathia). A narrow upper airway may lead to feeding, swallowing, and/or breathing difficulties; severe early respiratory infections; episodes in which there is absence of spontaneous breathing (apnea); anesthetic complications; and potentially life-threatening complications in severe cases. Abnormal softening of cartilage of the windpipe (tracheomalacia) has also been reported in some cases, which may further complicate swallowing and breathing difficulties. In addition, there have also been reports in which respiratory insufficiency (e.g., due to a narrow upper airway and/or tracheomalacia) has resulted in enlargement and strain of the lower right chamber (ventricle) of the heart (cor pulmonale) and possibly the left ventricle as well, leading to heart failure. Heart failure is an inability of the heart to pump enough blood to meet the body’s requirements for oxygen and other nutrients.
Most individuals with HSS have ocular abnormalities. The most common ocular finding is clouding (opacity) of the lenses of both eyes at birth (congenital bilateral cataracts). According to reports in the medical literature, the cataracts, which consist of whitish, milky lens masses, may gradually spontaneously resolve (spontaneous cataract absorption) in some cases. Many individuals with this disorder also have abnormal smallness of both eyes (bilateral microphthalmia) of varying severity and/or unusually deep-set eyes (enophthalmos). As a result of these small deeply-seated eyes, patients may appear to have small, droopy eyelids (blepharoptosis). The edges of the eyelids may appear to turn inwards, particularly on the lower side (lower lid entropion) so that the eyelashes rub against the eye surface (cornea) leading to irritation, erosions and corneal opacities. Some eye experts suggest corneal stromal opacities, which are ill defined and bilateral with clear stroma between the opacities might be a hallmark feature of this condition. In some cases, additional ocular defects may also be present, such as abnormal deviation of one eye in relation to the other (strabismus); involuntary, rapid, rhythmic eye movements (nystagmus); unusual blueness of the “whites” of the eyes (blue sclera); abnormally elevated pressure of the fluid of the eyes (glaucoma); retinal detachments; down-slanting eyelids (palpebral fissures); or malformed orbital bones and/or other findings. Such ocular defects may result in varying degrees of visual impairment or, in some cases, blindness.
Hallermann-Streiff syndrome is frequently characterized by dental abnormalities. These may include the eruption of teeth before or shortly after birth (natal or neonatal teeth), which may be misdiagnosed as supernumerary teeth.  There is also delayed eruption of permanent teeth, abnormal tooth development, with severely undeveloped roots leading to early loss of permanent teeth and partially developed crowns, improper contact between the teeth of the upper jaw and those of the lower jaw (malocclusion), and/or persistence of the primary (deciduous) teeth. Additional dental defects may include absence of permanent teeth (hypodontia or anodontia), and/or severe, early tooth decay with enamel hypoplasia.
In approximately one third of reported cases, infants with HSS are born prematurely and/or have a low birth weight. About two thirds of affected individuals have growth deficiency after birth and associated proportionate short stature.
In some cases, additional physical abnormalities have also been reported in association with the disorder. Some affected males may have decreased testicular function (hypogonadism), undescended testes (cryptorchidism), and/or abnormal placement of the urinary opening of the penis (hypospadias). Skeletal abnormalities have also been reported in some cases, such as widely flared shoulder blades (winged scapula), abnormal curvature of the spine (lordosis or scoliosis), abnormal depression of the breastbone (pectus excavatum), and/or webbing of fingers and/or toes (syndactyly). Radiological findings in infants can include a large, poorly ossified skull with decreased ossification in the sutural areas, multiple Wormian bones within sutures, and severe mid-facial hypoplasia with a prominent nasal bone, small teeth, thin and gracile long bones with poor demarcation of the cortex from the medullary portion, neonatal bowing of the radius and ulna and widening at the metaphyseal ends of the long bones. Some affected infants may also have vitiligo, a condition characterized by irregular patches of skin that lack pigmentation. In addition, in rare cases, various structural heart malformations (congenital heart defects) have been reported. Such congenital heart defects have included an abnormal opening in the partition (septum) that separates the lower or upper chambers of the heart (ventricular or atrial septal defects) or abnormal narrowing of the opening between the pulmonary artery and the right ventricle of the heart (pulmonary stenosis).
In most cases, children with this disorder have normal intelligence; however, intellectual disability has been reported in approximately 15 percent of cases. In rare instances, neurologic abnormalities have been noted, including hyperactivity; seizures, and/or choreoathetosis, a condition characterized by abnormal, involuntary, irregular jerky motions and slow, writhing movements. With more patients undergoing MRI studies, various structural abnormalities of the brain have been reported. One as such case showed the absence of the corpus callosum (the thick band of nerve fibers that connects the right and left halves of the brain).

