Hanhart Syndrome

synonyms:
aglossia-adactyliahypoglossia-hypodactylia syndromeperomelia with micrognathia

overview:
Summary
Hanhart syndrome is a rare condition characterized by a short, incompletely developed tongue (hypoglossia); absent or partially missing fingers and/or toes (hypodactylia); malformed arms and/or legs (peromelia); and an extremely small jaw (micrognathia).The severity of these physical abnormalities varies greatly from person to person. Children with this disorder often have some, but not all, of these symptoms. The cause of Hanhart syndrome is not fully understood.
Introduction
Hanhart syndrome is in the group of conditions known as oromandibular-limb hypogenesis syndromes (OLHS). These syndromes are characterized by underdevelopment of the limbs, mouth and jaw.
Hanhart syndrome was first described in 1932. In 1950, Dr. Hanhart described three children who had a missing tongue with associated limb defects and the name ‘Hanhart syndrome’ was adopted.

symptoms:
The craniofacial abnormalities in children with Hanhart syndrome can include a small mouth (microstomia); small jaw and deeply receding jaw (micrognathia); shorty, incompletely developed tongue (hypoglossia); cleft palate; cleft tongue; broad nose; increased distance between the inner corners of the eyelids (telecanthus); lower eyelid defects; facial asymmetry; and partial absence of the jaw (mandibular hypodontia).
Affected children may have fingers and/or toes that are partially missing or completely absent (ectrodactylia). In addition, lower (distal) portions of the arms and/or legs may be malformed, partially missing, and/or completely absent (amelia). Limb malformations may vary in severity from limb to limb (asymmetric).
Infants with Hanhart syndrome may have loss of some motor function (paralysis) in the facial area at birth due to impairment of one or more of the 12 nerve pairs that arise from the brain (cranial nerve palsy). In many cases, congenital nerve palsy of the 6th (abducens) and/or 7th (facialis) cranial nerves is present. In rarer cases, the 3rd (oculomotorius), 5th (trigeminus), 9th (glossopharyngeus), and/or 12th (hypoglossus) cranial nerves are affected. The presence of some of these nerve palsies can worsen any feeding problems that occur because of tongue, mouth, and/or jaw abnormalities.
Additional abnormalities may occur in association with Hanhart syndrome. In some affected individuals, the spleen and the gonads (i.e., testes in males, ovaries in females) may have fused together during fetal development (splenogonadal fusion). This may be manifested in males as a testicular mass or as a testis that has failed to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism). Some individuals may have vertical skin folds that cover the inner corners of the eyes (epicanthus); a malformation of the foot (clubfoot or talipes); an absent kidney (unilateral renal agenesis); a cyst in the brain (porencephalic cyst); and/or an absent or abnormally located anus (imperforate anus). Obstruction of the central portion of the small intestine (jejunal atresia) may occur due to twisting of the small intestine.
Intellectual disability may be present in some individuals with Hanhart syndrome.

