Hartnup Disease

synonyms:
Hartnup disorderHartnup syndromepellagra-cerebellar ataxia-renal aminoaciduria syndrome

overview:
Hartnup disease is a rare genetic disorder that involves an inborn error of amino acid metabolism. The disorder is characterized by a distinctive skin rash and in a few reported patients was accompanied by episodes of neurological involvement including an inability to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia), vision problems and cognitive delays. The symptoms associated with this disorder may be triggered by fever, drugs or situations when an affected individual is under emotional or physical stress such as during an illness. Generally, the frequency of such episodes usually diminishes with age. Hartnup disease is caused by changes (variants or mutations) in theSLC6A19gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.

symptoms:
The symptoms of Hartnup disease vary greatly from one person to another. Most affected individuals do not have any apparent symptoms (asymptomatic). When symptoms do develop, they most often occur between the ages of 3-9. In rare instances, symptoms first appear in adulthood.
The most common symptoms are red, scaly light-sensitive (photosensitive) rashes on the face, arms, extremities and other exposed areas of skin.
A wide variety of neurological abnormalities can occur including sudden episodes of impaired muscle coordination (ataxia), an unsteady walk (gait), impaired articulation of speech (dysarthria), occasional tremors of the hands and tongue, and spasticity, a condition marked by increased muscle tone and stiffness of the muscles, particularly in the legs.There have been reports of delayed cognitive development and, in rare instances, mild intellectual disability in some children. However, it’s unclear whether these symptoms are related to Hartnup disease or incidentally occurred in the same individual and were therefore attributed to Hartnup disease. Similarly, seizures, fainting, trembling, lack of muscle tone (hypotonia), headaches, dizziness and/or vertigo and delays in motor development have been observed but may be unrelated. Some affected individuals may experience psychiatric problems including emotional instability such as rapid mood changes, depression, confusion, anxiety, delusions and/or hallucinations.
Some children experience growth delays and may be shorter than would be expected based upon age and gender (short stature). In some people, the eyes may be affected, and individuals may experience double vision (diplopia), involuntary rhythmic movements of the eyes (nystagmus) and droopy upper eyelids (ptosis).
Diarrhea may precede or follow an episode of this disorder. Some adults with Hartnup disease have been reported whose initial symptom was the onset of seizures during adulthood. Heartburn has been reported in adults with the disorder.

