Hashimoto Encephalopathy

synonyms:
HEsteroid-responsive encephalopathy associated with autoimmune thyroiditis (SREAT)

overview:
Hashimoto encephalopathy is a rare disorder characterized by impaired brain function (encephalopathy). The exact cause is unknown, but it is believed to be an immune-mediated disorder or a disorder in which there is inflammation resulting from abnormal functioning of the immune system. Affected individuals have the presence of antithyroid antibodies in their body. Antibodies are part of the immune system; they are specialized proteins that target foreign or invading organisms. Antithyroid antibodies are ones that mistakenly target thyroid tissue. However, it is unclear whether these antibodies play any role in the development of Hashimoto encephalopathy or are a coincidental finding. The main signs and symptoms are related to the encephalopathy. The onset of impaired brain function is rapid (acute), while other times it can develop slowly over many years. The specific symptoms, severity, and course of the disorder can vary greatly among affected individuals. The disorder often responds to therapy with corticosteroids.
Some researchers believe there is a relationship between Hashimoto encephalopathy and Hashimoto thyroiditis, an autoimmune disorder in which antithyroid antibodies mistakenly damage the thyroid. The name Hashimoto encephalopathy comes from the presence of antithyroid antibodies and encephalopathy occurring together. Whether these two disorders are linked in any way is not fully understood. Because there is no evidence that the antithyroid antibodies in Hashimoto encephalopathy contribute to brain damage, and because most of the affected individuals have a normal-functioning thyroid, some researchers believe these are coincidental findings. Some physicians have preferred the name steroid-responsive encephalopathy associated with autoimmune thyroiditis or SREAT instead of Hashimoto encephalopathy.

symptoms:
The most important symptom is impaired brain function (encephalopathy), namely, altered mental status. It is impairment of the cognition, attention, orientation, sleep-wake cycle and consciousness.
Although researchers have been able to establish a clear syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about the disorder is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified cases, the lack of large clinical studies, and the possibility of other genes influencing the disorder prevent physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals and families should talk to their physicians and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
The specific symptoms and severity of the disorder can vary greatly from one individuals to another. The disorder may follow a relapsing and remitting course, which means that symptoms of cognitive decline and altered consciousness go through cycles where they worsen and improve.
In some individuals, the disorder will be slowly progressive rather than relapsing and remitting. In these individuals, there is a progressive pattern of cognitive decline including confusion, hallucinations, dementia, and, impairment of the sleep-wake cycle including difficulty in maintaining sleep and sleeping for longer periods of time than usual. Depression may be the initial sign in this form.
Although there are two distinct patterns of disease development for Hashimoto encephalopathy, the specific signs and symptoms can overlap. The severity, progression and specific symptoms associated with the disorder can vary greatly from one person to another.
Additional symptoms that can develop include seizures, fatigue, jitteriness or nervousness, overresponsive reflexes (hyperreflexia), poor appetite, confusion, loss of blood flow to an area of the brain called the cerebrum (cerebral ischemia), altered consciousness, and loss of contact with reality (psychosis). Sometimes, individuals may develop tremors, abnormal jerky movements (myoclonus), poor coordination of voluntary movements (ataxia), and slurred speech (dysarthria).
Affected individuals may be inattentive, lack concentration, and fail to understand basic concepts. They can also exhibit behavioral changes including depression, anxiety, emotional instability, social withdrawal, and changes in their personality.
The disorder can follow a limited course that resolves without treatment (self-limited), follow a course where the disease becomes worse over time (progressive), or follow a relapsing and remitting course.
Many people with Hashimoto encephalopathy have a normal-functioning thyroid (euthyroid) despite the presence of antithyroid antibodies. Other individuals may have an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism) or overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism). The thyroid is part of the endocrine system, the network of glands that secrete hormones that regulate that chemical processes (metabolism) that influence the body’s heart rate, body temperature and blood pressure.

