Hemiplegic Migraine

synonyms:
familial hemiplegic migrainesporadic hemiplegic migrainemigraine with motor aura

overview:
Hemiplegic migraine is a rare disorder in which affected individuals experience a migraine headache along with weakness on one side of the body (hemiplegia). Affected individuals are described as having a migraine with aura. Aura refers to additional neurological symptoms that occur with or sometimes before, the development of migraine headaches. Hemiplegia is an aura symptom. Additional aura symptoms usually affect vision, but also can affect speech, sensation and mental status. In some affected individuals, hemiplegic migraine occurs because of a change (variant or mutation) in a specific gene. This is called familial hemiplegic migraine. Abnormal variants in four genes,CACNA1A,ATP1A2,SCN1AandPRRT2, have all been shown to cause the familial forms. Some affected individuals are thought to develop the disorder because of a variant in an as-yet-unidentified gene. There is usually a family history of hemiplegic migraines in affected individuals. Some individuals may be the first person in their family with hemiplegic migraine; these individuals are described as having sporadic hemiplegic migraine.

symptoms:
Affected individuals experience hemiplegic migraine attacks. These attacks can range from about one a day to fewer than five in a lifetime. There can often be long episode-free periods during life. Generally, episodes become less frequent as a person ages. Individual episodes can vary in severity and duration. Hemiplegic migraine is a chronic disorder and can be extremely painful and debilitating.
Hemiplegic migraine attacks comprise an aura phase and a headache phase. Aura refers to additional neurological symptoms that occur with, or often shortly before, the development of migraine headaches. A migraine aura usually lasts about an hour but can take up to a week to completely resolve. Aura symptoms can often outlast the migraine headache itself.
Individuals with hemiplegic migraine experience weakness on one side of the body during the aura (hemiplegia), either just before or during the migraine headache. The degree of weakness can vary from mild to severe. Hemiplegia may affect only part of one side of the body, such as just the hand or the hands and arms, or the face. Weakness of the entire side of the body can occur. Hemiplegia is a distinct aura symptom that characterizes these disorders.
In hemiplegic migraine, the weakness is always associated with at least one other aura symptom. Vision is usually affected temporarily, and symptoms can include a sudden appearance of a bright light in the center of the field of vision causing blind spots (scintillating scotoma), double vision, flashing lights (photopsia) and bright, shimmering, jagged lines (fortification spectra). Visual symptoms can also include foggy vision or a loss of vision of one half of the visual field. Additional symptoms include numbness or a prickly sensation of the face or arms and legs (paresthesia), fever, imbalance, drowsiness or lethargy and an inability to understand or express speech (aphasia). The aura rarely involves abnormal movement of one hand or one arm preceding the motor weakness. The specific aura symptoms that develop during a migraine attack can vary from one attack to another. Some individuals with hemiplegic migraine may also have attacks with a so-called typical aura, including visual, sensory and speech troubles but no weakness.
During an attack of hemiplegic migraine, headache might start shortly before, during or after the aura. Migraine headaches cause throbbing, intense, sometimes debilitating pain and are notably stronger than regular headaches. The pain can cause nausea or vomiting, and affected individuals may be extremely sensitive to light (photophobia) and to sound (phonophobia).
In severe instances, affected individuals may experience prolonged weakness, seizures, confusion, memory loss, and personality or behavioral changes. Although uncommon, hemiplegic migraine attacks can be severe enough to cause coma. During such severe hemiplegic migraine attacks, weakness and speech troubles can last for several days or weeks but usually fully resolve. In rare instances, permanent complications can develop including intellectual disability.
A minority of individuals with hemiplegic migraine develop signs or symptoms of involvement of the cerebellum, the area of the brain that controls coordination and balance and is also involved in cognition and behavior. These signs or symptoms can include uncontrolled, repetitive movements of the eyes (nystagmus), slurred speech (dysarthria) and a lack of coordination of voluntary movements (ataxia). These symptoms are permanent and usually slowly progress with ageing.
A minority of individuals with hemiplegic migraine may develop epileptic seizures outside of hemiplegic migraine attacks.
A minority of individuals with familial hemiplegic migraine may have delayed acquisition of speech and motor features during early childhood, learning difficulties or rarely, cognitive disabilities.

