Hemophilia A

synonyms:
classical hemophiliafactor VIII deficiencyhaemophilia A

overview:
Summary
Hemophilia A, also known as classical hemophilia, is a genetic bleeding disorder caused by insufficient levels of a blood protein called factor VIII. Factor VIII is a clotting factor. Clotting factors are specialized proteins that are essential for proper clotting, the process by which blood clumps together to plug the site of a wound to stop bleeding. Individuals with hemophilia A do not bleed faster or more profusely than healthy individuals, but because their blood clots poorly, they have difficulty stopping the flow of blood from a wound. This may be referred to as prolonged bleeding or a prolonged bleeding episode. Hemophilia A can be mild, moderate or severe, depending on the baseline level of factor VIII made by that individual. In mild cases, prolonged bleeding episodes may only occur after surgery, dental procedures or trauma. In more severely affected individuals, symptoms may include prolonged bleeding from minor wounds, painful swollen bruises, and unexplained (spontaneous) bleeding into vital organs as well as joints and muscles (internal bleeding).
Hemophilia A is caused by disruptions or changes (variants or mutations) to theF8gene located on the X chromosome. This variant may be inherited or occur randomly with no previous family history of the disorder (spontaneously). Hemophilia A is mostly expressed in males but some females who carry the gene variant may have mild or, rarely, severe symptoms of bleeding. Although there is no cure for hemophilia, effective therapies have been developed; most affected individuals can lead full, productive lives by maintaining proper treatment and care.
Introduction
Hemophilia is a general term for a group of rare bleeding disorders caused by congenital deficiency of certain clotting factors. The most common form of hemophilia is hemophilia A. In rare cases, hemophilia A can be acquired during life (acquired hemophilia A) as a result of an auto-antibody to factor VIII. Although both disorders involve deficiency of the same clotting factor, the bleeding pattern is quite different. The reason the bleeding patterns differ between these disorders is not fully understood. This report only deals with the genetic form of hemophilia A.

symptoms:
The severity and symptoms of hemophilia A can vary greatly from one person to another. Hemophilia A can range from mild to moderate to severe. Factor VIII levels in these categories are 5-40% of normal, 1-5%, and less than 1%, respectively. The age of onset and frequency of bleeding episodes depend upon the amount of factor VIII protein and overall clotting ability of the blood. In most individuals, regardless of severity, bleeding episodes tend to be more frequent in childhood and adolescence than in adulthood.
It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
In mild cases, individuals may experience bruising and bleeding from the mucous membranes such as nosebleeds or bleeding from the gums. More serious, prolonged bleeding episodes may occur only after surgery or dental procedures, injury or trauma. The bleeding in such cases is out of proportion for the procedure or trauma. In many cases, individuals with mild hemophilia A may go undiagnosed until they need a surgical procedure or suffer an injury. In some cases, the first bleeding episode does not occur until well into adulthood. Individuals with a mild form of hemophilia A may go many years without a prolonged bleeding episode. Mild hemophilia A can be associated with anywhere from 5-40% factor VIII clotting activity.
Individuals with moderate hemophilia A seldom have spontaneous bleeding episodes. Spontaneous bleeding refers to bleeding episodes that occur without apparent cause. Individuals with moderate hemophilia A are at risk for prolonged bleeding following surgery, dental procedures or trauma. Easy or excessive bruising may also occur. Moderate hemophilia A is often diagnosed by 5 or 6 years of age. By definition, affected individuals have 1-5% of normal factor VIII clotting activity.
Severe hemophilia A occurs in individuals with less than 1% of normal factor VIII clotting activity. In contrast to the mild or moderate forms of the disease, severe hemophilia A is associated with spontaneous bleeding episodes. Such episodes often result in bleeding into the deep muscles or joints (hemarthroses), which will acutely cause pain and swelling and early restricted movement of the joint. If not treated in a timely manner or at all, bleeding may result in longer term arthritis (pain and restricted movement) of the affected joint. The joints and muscles are the most common sites for spontaneous bleeding episodes in individuals with severe hemophilia A.
Severe cases of hemophilia A usually become apparent early during infancy and a diagnosis is often made by two years of age. Without prophylactic treatment, these infants may experience bleeding from minor mouth injuries. Common symptoms in untreated infants are large swellings or “goose eggs” that form after a bump on the head. In rare cases, infants with severe hemophilia A have extra- or intracranial bleeding following birth. Untreated infants and children may also develop hematomas under the skin. Hematomas are solid swellings or masses of congealed blood. As infants and children grow older, spontaneous joint bleeds may become more frequent.
If untreated, infants and children with severe hemophilia A may have approximately two to five spontaneous bleeding episodes per month. Without treatment, affected individuals are at risk for prolonged bleeding from minor injuries, surgery and dental procedures such as tooth extractions.
Individuals with the severe form of hemophilia A can experience spontaneous bleeding into any organ system including the kidneys, the gastrointestinal tract, and the brain (intracranial bleeding). Genitourinary and gastrointestinal bleeding may respectively cause blood in the urine (hematuria) and black or bloody stools (melena, hematochezia). Intracranial bleeding may cause headaches, stiff neck, vomiting, seizures, mental status changes including excessive sleepiness and poor arousability. If untreated, these frequently occurring spontaneous bleeding events can be life-threatening.

