Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis

synonyms:
hemophagocytic syndromeHLH

overview:
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a rare, life-threatening condition caused by an overactive, abnormal response of the immune system. The immune system is the body’s natural defense system against foreign or invading organisms or substances. The immune system is a complex network of cells, tissues, organs, and proteins that work together to keep the body healthy. In hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, the immune system responds to a stimulus or ‘trigger’, often an infection, but the response is ineffective and abnormal. This ineffective, abnormal response, causes a variety of signs and symptoms, which, if not treated, can potentially become life-threatening. Some affected individuals may have a genetic predisposition to developing hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. This is known as the primary or familial form. In other individuals, the disorder occurs sporadically usually when there is an underlying predisposing condition or disorder. This is known as the secondary form. The secondary forms are more common than the familial forms. Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis most often affects infants from birth to 18 months, but can affect individuals of any age. Early diagnosis and prompt treatment is essential.
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a condition with different underlying causes. There are several names used to describe this condition. Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) refers to genetic forms that are caused by an abnormal variant in a gene. As of April 2018, abnormalities in multiple genes have been identified as causes. Macrophage activation syndrome (MAS) is the term used for hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis that occurs in people with an autoimmune or autoinflammatory disease. This is a type of secondary HLH. The diseases most commonly associated with MAS are juvenile systemic arthritis, adult-onset Still’s disease, and systemic lupus erythematosus.

symptoms:
The onset and severity of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis can vary greatly from one person to another. The specific symptoms that develop can also vary greatly, although the condition often causes multiorgan involvement. Generally, affected individuals develop fevers, a rash, an abnormally large liver (hepatomegaly), and an abnormally large spleen (splenomegaly). Fevers may be prolonged and persistent, often failing to respond to antibiotics. Sometimes, the lymph nodes are also abnormally large (lymphadenopathy). Lymph nodes are part of the lymphatic system, a circulatory network of vessels, ducts, and nodes that filter and distribute certain protein-rich (lymph) and blood cells throughout the body. Lymph nodes are small structures, found in groups throughout the body, that help to filter or drain out harmful substances from the body.
These initial sign and symptoms are described as nonspecific. This means that these signs and symptoms are common to many other different disorders or conditions, which can make getting a correct diagnosis difficult.
Affected individuals may also have low levels circulating red blood cells (anemia) and low levels of circulating platelets (thrombocytopenia). Red blood cells deliver oxygen to the body and platelets allow the body to form clots to stop bleeding. Individuals with anemia may experience tiredness, increased need for sleep, weakness, lightheadedness, dizziness, irritability, headaches, pale skin color, difficulty breathing (dyspnea), and cardiac symptoms. Individuals with thrombocytopenia are more susceptible to excessive bruising following minimal injury and to spontaneous bleeding from the mucous membranes, especially those of the gums and nose.
Some affected individuals may develop neurological symptoms including seizures, changes in mental status and irritability, paralysis (palsy) of certain cranial nerves, and problems coordinating voluntary movements (ataxia). Affected individuals are at risk of developing posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome, which causes a rapid onset of headaches, altered consciousness, seizures, and disturbances in vision. Neurological problems are most common with familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.
Additional symptoms can occur depending upon the specific organ system involved in an individual. These symptoms can include significant problems breathing (lung dysfunction), severe low blood pressure (hypotension), liver inflammation (hepatitis), kidney dysfunction, yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice), swelling due to fluid accumulation (edema), abdominal swelling due to fluid accumulation (ascites), and a variety of skin problems including widespread, reddening of the skin because of inflammation (erythroderma), rashes, blood spots (purpura), and tiny spots on the skin (petechiae).

