Hemophilia B

synonyms:
Christmas diseasefactor IX deficiencyroyal disease

overview:
Summary
Hemophilia B is a rare genetic bleeding disorder in which affected individuals have insufficient levels of a blood protein called factor IX. Factor IX is a clotting factor. Clotting factors are specialized proteins needed for blood clotting, the process by which blood seals a wound to stop bleeding and promote healing. Individuals with hemophilia B do not bleed faster than unaffected individuals, they bleed longer. This is because they are missing or have a decreased amount of a protein involved in blood clotting and are unable to effectively stop the flow of blood from a wound, injury or bleeding site. This is sometimes referred to as prolonged bleeding or a bleeding episode.
Hemophilia B is classified as mild, moderate or severe based upon the activity level of factor IX. In mild cases, bleeding symptoms may occur only after surgery, injury or a dental procedure. In some moderate and most severe cases, bleeding symptoms may occur after a minor injury or spontaneously, meaning without an identifiable cause.
Hemophilia B is caused by changes (variants or mutations) in the factor IX gene (F9) on the X chromosome. Hemophilia B is most commonly identified in males; however, females who carry the gene may have mild or, rarely, more severe symptoms of bleeding and should have their factor IX level checked.

Introduction
Hemophilia B, also known as factor IX deficiency or Christmas disease, is the second most common type of hemophilia. The disorder was first reported in the medical literature in 1952 in a patient with the name of Stephen Christmas. The most well-known family with hemophilia B was that of Queen Victoria of England. Through her descendants, the disorder was passed down to the royal families of Germany, Spain and Russia and thus hemophilia B is also known as the “royal disease.”
Although the focus of this report is the genetic, or inherited, form of hemophilia B, it should be noted that another form called acquired hemophilia B can develop, most commonly later in life (see “Related Disorders” section below). An individual with acquired hemophilia B is not born with the condition. Acquired hemophilia B is caused by the body’s production of antibodies against its own factor IX protein. The factor IX antibodies destroy circulating factor IX in the blood causing bleeding symptoms. Acquired hemophilia B is extremely rare; most cases of acquired hemophilia are in those with hemophilia A or factor VIII deficiency.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of hemophilia B vary greatly based upon the level of factor IX present. Hemophilia B can range from mild to moderate to severe. Individuals with mild hemophilia have factor IX levels between 5 and 40% of normal; those with moderate hemophilia have factor levels from 1 to 5% of normal; and individuals with severe hemophilia have factor levels less than 1% of normal. The age an individual becomes aware that they have hemophilia B, known as age of diagnosis, and the frequency of bleeding episodes depends upon the amount of factor IX present in the blood and the family history.
In mild cases of hemophilia B, individuals may experience bruising and bleeding after surgery, dental procedures, injury or trauma. Although some bleeding occurs in individuals without hemophilia after injury or trauma, individuals with hemophilia B often have longer and more severe bleeding episodes with these occurrences. Many individuals with mild hemophilia B may go undiagnosed until a surgical procedure is needed, or an injury occurs. Individuals with mild hemophilia may not experience their first bleeding episode until adulthood. Additionally, individuals with the mild form of hemophilia B may go many years between bleeding episodes.
Individuals with moderate hemophilia B may have occasional episodes of spontaneous bleeding from deep tissues such as joints and muscles. Spontaneous bleeding refers to bleeding episodes that occur without an identifiable cause. The individual may not be able to identify an event that may have occurred. Individuals with moderate hemophilia B are also at risk for prolonged bleeding following surgery or trauma. Affected individuals are usually diagnosed by five or six years of age but this may vary as well. The frequency of spontaneous bleeding episodes in individuals with moderate hemophilia B is highly variable.
In severe cases of hemophilia B, frequent, spontaneous bleeding episodes are the most common symptom. Spontaneous bleeding episodes may include bleeding into the muscles and joints. This often causes pain and swelling and restricts movement of the joint. Bleeding into a joint is called hemarthrosis. If left untreated, this often results in long-term damage including inflammation of the membrane lining the joints (synovitis) and joint disease (arthropathy) and muscle weakness and/or swelling, tightness and restricted movement around the affected joint. Permanent joint damage may occur. Additional symptoms affecting individuals with severe hemophilia B include easy bruising and bleeding into deep tissues such as the muscles, in addition, nosebleeds, gastrointestinal and central nervous system bleeding.
Individuals with a moderate or severe form of hemophilia can potentially experience spontaneous bleeding into other areas including the kidneys, stomach, intestines and brain. Bleeding within the kidneys or stomach and intestines may cause blood in the urine, called hematuria and stomach/intestines, called melena or hematochezia, respectively. Bleeding within the brain may cause headaches, stiff neck, vomiting, seizures and mental status changes including excessive sleepiness and poor arousability, and may result in permanent neurologic damage and/or death if left untreated.
Severe cases of hemophilia B usually become apparent early during infancy or childhood. Without preventative treatment, called prophylaxis, a young child may experience two to five spontaneous bleeding episodes per month. Infants are diagnosed with hemophilia B based on a known family history of hemophilia or after they develop bleeding due to a bleeding event which may but not always occur with circumcision, a neonatal procedure; bleeding within the brain or around the head, called an intracranial bleed or extracranial bleed, resulting from delivery may also occur. If an infant is not diagnosed at birth, hemophilia may be suspected if the child develops excessive bruising or deep tissue bleeding in areas such as the buttock muscles from falling while learning to walk; bleeding into the joints; or prolonged bleeding in the mouth due to an injury such as a fall or abnormal bruising or bleeding with immunizations.

