Henoch-Schönlein Purpura

synonyms:
Allergic PurpuraAllergic VasculitisAnaphylactoid PurpuraHemorrhagic Capillary ToxicosisHSPLeukocytoclastic VasculitisNonthrombocytopenic Idiopathic PurpuraPeliosis RheumaticaRheumatic PurpuraSchonlein-Henoch Purpuravascular purpura

overview:
Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP) is a rare inflammatory disease of the small blood vessels (capillaries) and is usually a self-limited disease. It is the most common form of childhood vascular inflammation (vasculitis) and results in inflammatory changes in the small blood vessels. The symptoms of HSP usually begin suddenly and may include headache, fever, loss of appetite, cramping, abdominal pain, painful menstruation, hives, bloody diarrhea, and joint pain. Red or purple spots typically appear on the skin (petechiae). Inflammatory changes associated with HSP can also develop in the joints, kidneys, digestive system, and, in rare cases, the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system).
In one form of the disorder, termed Schönlein’s purpura, the skin and joints are affected but the gastrointestinal tract is not. In another form, known as Henoch’s purpura, affected individuals have purplish spots on the skin and acute abdominal problems, such as glomerulonephritis (a type of kidney disorder). People with Henoch’s purpura are not affected by joint disease.
The exact cause of HSP is not fully understood, although research demonstrates that it is related to an abnormal response by the immune system or, in some rare cases, an extreme allergic reaction to certain offending substances (e.g., foods or drugs).

symptoms:
The symptoms of HSP usually begin suddenly. In addition to the characteristic red spotting of the skin (most often on the buttocks and backs of the legs), they may include headache, loss of appetite, and/or fever. The skin typically becomes red (diffuse erythema). Cramping abdominal pain may occur and is usually most severe during the night. Blood may be present in the stool and abnormal bleeding (hemorrhaging) from the gastrointestinal tract can cause bloody diarrhea. Joint pain (arthralgia) may develop in any joint of the body, especially the knees and ankles. Some people with HSP experience vomiting and diarrhea; others may have severe constipation and unusually dark stool (melena).
Individuals with HSP typically develop small red or purple spots (petechiae) on the skin, especially on the legs. These purpura spots are caused by small hemorrhages under the skin and are not associated with abnormally low levels of platelets (nonthrombocytopenic) as is common with some other forms of purpura. Other skin lesions associated with HSP include large hives (urticarial wheals) or ulcers (necrotic), especially on the buttocks and legs. Swelling may occur in the face and neck due to abnormal fluid accumulation in the soft tissues of these areas (angioneurotic edema). In rare cases, swelling and edema in the throat can cause breathing difficulties that can lead to life-threatening respiratory problems.
Between one-quarter and one-half of people with HSP have problems with kidney function, such as glomerulonephritis, in which the portion of the kidney that separates waste from the blood is damaged. Blood in the urine (hematuria) and inflammatory changes in the kidneys may also develop. Some people may develop severe kidney disease, including IgG nephropathy, chronic inflammation of the kidneys (nephritis), and/or nephrotic syndrome leading to kidney failure.
In rare cases, a portion of the affected person’s bowel or intestine may fold in upon itself (intussusception). This can result in substantial pain and, if conservative measures do not resolve the problem, surgery may be required.
When the central nervous system is involved, individuals with this disorder may experience severe headaches, perceptual changes, convulsions, visual difficulties (optic atrophy), and/or seizures.

