Hepatoerythropoietic Porphyria

synonyms:
autosomal recessive PCTHEP

overview:
Summary
Hepatoerythropoietic porphyria (HEP) is an extremely rare genetic disorder characterized by deficiency of the enzyme, uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase. This deficiency is caused by mutations of both copies of a person’s UROD gene, which means that the disorder is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. Most affected individuals have a profound deficiency of this enzyme and onset of the disorder is usually during infancy or early childhood. However, some individuals may have a mild form that can go undiagnosed until adulthood. The childhood form of HEP is often associated with painful, blistering skin lesions that develop on sun-exposed skin (photosensitivity). Affected areas of skin can scar and become discolored. There may be risk of bacterial infection. Abnormal, excessive hair (hypertrichosis) on affected skin is also common. Mild anemia and abnormal enlargement of the liver and/or spleen (hepatosplenomegaly) have also been reported. Mild cases of HEP may go unrecognized until adulthood and can be clinically indistinguishable from porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT), a related disorder that may be acquired or occur in individuals with a mutation of one UROD gene (autosomal dominant inheritance). Cutaneous photosensitivity is generally much more severe in HEP than in PCT. NORD has a separate report on porphyria cutanea tarda.
Introduction
HEP belongs to a group of disorders known as the porphyrias. This group of at least seven disorders is characterized by abnormally high levels of porphyrins and porphyrin precursors due to deficiency of certain enzymes essential to the creation (synthesis) of heme, a part of hemoglobin and other hemoproteins. There are eight enzymes in the pathway for making heme and at least seven major forms of porphyria. The symptoms associated with the various forms of porphyria differ. It is important to note that people who have one type of porphyria do not develop any of the other types. Porphyrias are generally classified into two groups: the “hepatic” and “erythropoietic” types. Porphyrins and porphyrin precursors and related substances originate in excess amounts predominantly from the liver in the hepatic types and mostly from the bone marrow in the erythropoietic types. Porphyrias with skin manifestations are sometimes referred to as “cutaneous porphyrias”. The term “acute porphyria” is used to describe porphyrias that can be associated with sudden attacks of pain and other neurological symptoms. HEP is a hepatic and cutaneous porphyria.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of HEP can vary from one person to another. Onset is usually within the first two years of life, but mild cases that go undiagnosed until adulthood have been reported. Although HEP is associated with specific, characteristic symptoms, several factors, including the small number of identified cases, make it difficult to establish the full range of associated symptoms of the disorder.
Severe cutaneous photosensitivity is usually the first sign. Affected infants may have extremely fragile skin that that can peel or blister on minimal impact is common. Reddening of the skin is common (erythema). Blistering skin lesions can develop on sun-exposed skin such as the hands and face. Photosensitivity can be severe and can cause scarring, erosion, and disfigurement. Bacterial infection of skin lesions can occur.
Abnormal, excessive hair growth (hypertrichosis) may also occur on sun-exposed skin. Affected skin may darken or lose color (hyper- or hypopigmentation). Small bumps with a distinct white head (milia) may also develop. Some affected individuals have teeth that are reddish-brown colored (erythrodontia).
Low levels of circulating red blood cells (anemia) may also occur. Anemia may be due to the premature destruction of red blood cells (hemolysis). Anemia associated with HEP may be mild or severe. Severe anemia may be associated with fatigue, pale skin, irregular heartbeat, chest pain, dizziness, and abnormally cold hands and feet. Some individuals may have an abnormally enlarged liver and/or spleen (hepatosplenomegaly).
Mild cases of HEP can go undiagnosed until adulthood. Overt photosensitivity may not be seen and mild skin damage can be mistaken for other conditions during childhood.

