Hepatorenal Syndrome

synonyms:
hepato-renal syndromeHRS

overview:
Hepatorenal syndrome (HRS) is a form of impaired kidney function that occurs in individuals with advanced liver disease. Individuals with hepatorenal syndrome do not have any identifiable cause of kidney dysfunction and the kidneys themselves are not structural damaged. Therefore, hepatorenal syndrome may be referred as a “functional” form of kidney impairment. In fact, if the kidney of an individual with hepatorenal syndrome were to be transplanted into an otherwise healthy individual, it would function normally. Hepatorenal syndrome is classified into to two distinct types. Type I is a rapidly progressive condition that leads to renal failure; type II does not have a rapid course and progresses slowly over weeks to months.
Although the hepatorenal syndrome occurs in individuals with liver disease, the exact cause of the condition is unknown. Researchers have noted that blood circulation is abnormal in individuals with hepatorenal syndrome. The arteries that circulate oxygenated blood from the lungs to the rest of the body (systemic circulation) widen in contrast to the arteries of the kidney, which narrow causing a decrease in the blood flow through the kidney. Many affected individuals also have high blood pressure of the branches of the portal vein (portal hypertension), the main vein that carries blood from the intestines to the liver.

symptoms:
Individuals with hepatorenal syndrome will have a variety of nonspecific symptoms including fatigue, abdominal pain, and a general feeling of ill health (malaise). Affected individuals also have symptoms related to advanced liver disease including the accumulation of fluid in the abdomen (ascites), yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes (jaundice), an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly) and an enlarged, extremely tender liver (hepatomegaly).
Hepatorenal syndrome type I is characterized by a rapid decrease in kidney function. The kidneys act as a filtration system removing unwanted substances and excess fluid from the body. Symptoms of decreasing renal function include the accumulation of excess watery fluid in the spaces between the tissues and organs causing swelling of these areas (edema), dramatically decreased urination, and the presence of increased nitrogenous waste products such as creatinine and BUN in the blood (azotemia). Hepatorenal syndrome type I can progress to life-threatening renal failure within days.
Individuals with hepatorenal syndrome type I are more likely to suffer from hepatic encephalopathy, a condition that occurs when the liver fails to breakdown (metabolize) certain substances in the body. These substances travel through the bloodstream to the brain with toxic effects. Hepatic encephalopathy may cause confusion, drowsiness, recognizable changes in judgment and other intellectual processes, and other psychological alterations. It also is more likely to occur with acute liver failure due to any cause.
Hepatorenal syndrome type II causes renal dysfunction that generally progresses much slower than it does in type I. Affected individuals are less likely to develop jaundice and usually do not develop hepatic encephalopathy. Individuals with hepatorenal syndrome type II often develop accumulation of fluid in the abdomen (ascites) does not respond to treatment with diuretics, which are drugs that help remove excess fluid from the body. This finding is referred to as diuretic-resistant ascites. It can occur over weeks to months with a slow rise of BUN and Creatinine.

