Hepatic Encephalopathy

synonyms:
HEportal-systemic encephalopathy

overview:
Hepatic encephalopathy is a brain disorder that develops in some individuals with liver disease. Hepatic encephalopathy is a complex disorder that encompasses a spectrum or continuum of disease that ranges from a subtle condition with no outward signs or symptoms to a severe form that can cause serious, life-threatening complications. Symptoms are related to progressive dysfunction of the brain and may include personality changes, intellectual impairment, impaired memory and loss of consciousness (coma). Hepatic encephalopathy can occur in individuals with acute or chronic liver (hepatic) disease or in individuals whose liver is bypassed by a portosystemic shunt (with no liver disease present). A portosystemic shunt is an abnormal passageway that allows blood from the gastrointestinal tract to bypass the liver. They can be present at birth (congenital) or acquired during life. Hepatic encephalopathy is caused when toxins that are normally cleared from the body by the liver accumulate in the blood, eventually traveling to the brain. Many of the symptoms of hepatic encephalopathy are reversible when promptly detected and treated.

symptoms:
Hepatic encephalopathy encompasses a spectrum or continuum of disease and, consequently, the symptoms and severity of the disorder can vary widely from one person to another. The severity of hepatic encephalopathy can range from mild, barely discernable symptoms to serious, life-threatening complications. Hepatic encephalopathy may develop slowly over time in individuals with chronic liver disease or may occur episodically, worsening and then improving only to recur. An episode of hepatic encephalopathy is often triggered by certain conditions such as infection, gastrointestinal bleeding, constipation, certain drugs, surgery or an alcohol binge. Episodes of hepatic encephalopathy can develop rapidly and without warning, often necessitating hospitalization.
It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis. Many of the symptoms of hepatic encephalopathy are reversible when promptly identified and treated.
Hepatic encephalopathy is sometimes broken down into three subtypes: Type A, which is associated with acute liver failure; Type B, which is associated a portosystemic shunt (a shunt that bypasses the liver) with no existing liver disease present; and Type C, which is associated with scarring and poor function of the liver (cirrhosis), which often occurs with chronic liver disease.
While the symptoms are similar among these different subtypes of hepatic encephalopathy, individuals with acute liver failure are more likely to have swelling (edema) in the brain and increased pressure within the skull (intracranial hypertension), which can potentially cause life-threatening complications.
Researchers now believe that as many as 70 percent of individuals with cirrhosis development symptoms of hepatic encephalopathy. Many individuals only develop mild symptoms, so-called minimal hepatic encephalopathy (MHE).
MHE may not be associated with any obvious or outwardly noticeable signs or symptoms. However, there may be subtle or minimal changes in memory, concentration, and intellectual function. Coordination may also be affected and some affected individuals may take longer to respond to situations (increased reaction time). These symptoms, although termed “subtle”, can still have significant consequences on daily life such as impairing a person’s ability to drive a car.
Hepatic encephalopathy can be associated with more severe symptoms including reduced alertness, shortened attention span, disruptions in sleep patterns, mild confusion, slowing of the ability to perform mental tasks and mood or personality changes. More noticeable changes in memory, concentration or intellectual function than occur in MHE may also be seen. When affected individuals have obvious, outward signs and symptoms, the disorder may be referred to as overt hepatic encephalopathy.
Eventually, affected individuals may develop lethargy, slurred speech, confusion, significant delays in performing mental tasks, and regression of skills requiring the coordination of mental and physical activities (psychomotor retardation). Affected individuals may also develop obvious personality changes including inappropriate behavior or lack of restraint. Some individuals may slowly flap their hands up and down when attempting to hold their arms out, a condition known as asterixis.
In the most severe form of hepatic encephalopathy, affected individuals may develop marked confusion or disorientation, amnesia, greatly dulled or reduced consciousness (stupor) or loss of consciousness (coma). Additional severe and potentially life-threatening complications of cirrhosis include permanent nervous system damage, heart failure, kidney abnormalities including kidney failure, breathing (respiratory) abnormalities and blood poisoning (sepsis).

