Hepatitis D

synonyms:
HDVhepatitis D virushepatitis deltadelta hepatitisdelta infection

overview:
Summary
Hepatitis D is a liver disease caused by the hepatitis delta virus (HDV). HDV is known as a “satellite virus” or an “incomplete virus” because it can only infect people who are also infected with the hepatitis B virus (HBV). Patients with an HDV infection may have an acute co-infection (an infection discovered at the same time as HBV) or a new or “superinfection” (when a patient already infected with HBV later acquires HDV). Both forms of infection can cause a chronic, long-term illness. Age of onset can occur at birth through mother to child transmission (rare), and more importantly, can occur through infection as an adult. Chronic HDV is one of the most severe forms of viral hepatitis (liver inflammation due to a viral infection) and causes more severe liver disease than having chronic HBV infection alone. Chronic HDV is also associated with a more accelerated progression of liver disease, a higher risk of liver cancer and early development of liver complications in patients who have already developed cirrhosis (end stage liver disease), liver failure, liver transplant, and death. An accurate prevalence of HDV is unknown given there is suboptimal awareness and testing for this disease both domestically and globally. However, recent studies estimate that the prevalence of HDV ranges from 12 to 74 million individuals affected worldwide, and it likely affects 5-10% of patients with chronic HBV infection. This emphasizes the need for further research and data in order to formulate an accurate estimate of HDV prevalence and to understand which individuals are at greatest risk of HDV infection. Despite the severity of this disease and how quickly it can lead to liver damage and deterioration, there are no current recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) or World Health Organization (WHO) to make this a reportable disease, and there are no FDA-approved therapies available for HDV treatment. One medication called bulevirtide (Hepcludex, Myr/Gilead Sciences) is approved in Europe. In addition, there are many promising therapies for HDV on the horizon.
Introduction
One of the first physicians to describe HDV was Dr. Mario Rizzetto in the 1970s. Dr. Rizzetto detected a new antigen-antibody complex in the liver cell nuclei of patients with chronic HBV infection. Antigens are molecules capable of stimulating an immune response, and antibodies (immunoglobins) are Y-shaped proteins produced by B cells of the immune system in response to exposure to antigens. He used direct immunofluorescence (a technique for determining the location of an antigen/antibody in tissues by reaction with an antibody/antigen labeled with a fluorescent dye) to find this new antigen-antibody and he named this antigen delta. He observed that there was a higher prevalence of the delta antigen in chronic HBV patients with more severe liver damage. This delta antigen was ultimately confirmed by others and became what we know today as HDV. While the presence of HDV has been known for many years, the prevalence of HDV remains unclear, primarily due to suboptimal awareness and testing for this disease. There are many factors that contribute to suboptimal testing, including the need for wider availability of improved HDV diagnostic tests, the need for greater awareness of risks of this disease among patients and providers, more clear guidelines and recommendations about which populations to target for HDV testing, and lack of effective therapies to manage HDV. Given the aforementioned risks of HDV in contributing to more aggressive disease progression, including the higher risk of cirrhosis and liver cancer, early detection is critical. Emerging HDV therapeutics on the horizon should dramatically expand the treatment landscape in the future.

symptoms:
As previously noted, HDV can present as a co-infection or as a superinfection. Co-infection occurs when a person is simultaneously infected with both HBV and HDV, which is generally less common than superinfection. Superinfection occurs when a person who is already infected with HBV acquires HDV infection.  Age of onset can vary from acquiring infection at birth via mother to child transmission to acquiring as an adult through different routes of infection detailed below.
HDV infection can occur and resolve suddenly (acute disease) or develop into a long-term illness (chronic disease). Signs and symptoms of acute HDV infection typically appear 3-7 weeks after initial infection and are indistinguishable from symptoms seen in other types of acute viral hepatitis infection. Some of these symptoms include fever, fatigue, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, dark-colored urine, clay-colored bowel movements, joint pain and jaundice. These symptoms can progress to liver failure and death in some instances or can resolve and develop into a chronic infection. Chronic HDV infection, on the other hand, accelerates disease progression in patients with chronic HBV, which leads to earlier development of cirrhosis, liver cancer and liver decompensation. A person with chronic HBV who acquires HDV infection has a very low chance of clearing the virus spontaneously, and over 80% of patients infected with HDV will develop chronic HDV infection as superinfection.

