Hereditary Sensory and Autonomic Neuropathy Type 1E

synonyms:
hereditary sensory autonomic neuropathy with dementia and hearing lossneuropathy, hereditary sensory, with hearing loss and dementiaHSAN1EDNMT1 complex disorder

overview:
Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type 1E (HSAN1E) is a rare genetic disorder. It is considered an adult-onset disorder with symptoms usually starting to occur in the 20-30’s. Although HSAN1E is considered to be a subtype of HSAN, a group of genetic disorders most-ly affecting the sensory and autonomic neurons of the peripheral nervous system, the central nervous system is also severely affected in HSAN1E patients, especially in the later stage of the disease. HSAN1E patients usually have three main symptoms, hearing loss, sensory neu-ropathy, and cognitive decline (dementia), and many have other various symptoms such as sleep disorders and epilepsy. The symptoms are progressive, worsening with age. At this time, there are no available treatments other than management for each specific symptom, (i.e., hearing aids for the hearing loss) and there is currently no cure for HSAN1E. Based on a re-cent study, the average life span of HSAN1E patients is approximately 50 years. HSAN1E is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder caused by a mutation in theDNMT1gene.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of HSAN1E and the age of onset are variable, even within members of the same family. HSAN1E typically runs a 15 to 30 year progressive course.
HSAN1E is an adult-onset disorder with an average onset age of 37 years. All HSAN1E pa-tients have presented with a triad of symptoms: hearing loss, sensory neuropathy, and cogni-tive decline. Bilateral hearing loss is often the first symptom and it continues to get worse over time.
Peripheral neuropathy occurs when nerves that carry messages to and from the brain and spinal cord to the rest of the body are damaged. Those affected may experience tingling, burning, numbness, and stabbing pain. As it progresses, peripheral neuropathy can lead to sores or infections in the feet that don’t heal, weakness, and balance and walking problems.
The cognitive decline (dementia) often starts with personality changes, poor decision making, memory loss, irritability, impulsivity, apathy, and sleepiness.
Some other symptoms of HSAN1E are seizures, auditory or visual hallucinations, renal fail-ure, and sleep disorders.

