Hereditary Sensory and Autonomic Neuropathy Type II

synonyms:
acroosteolysis, Giaccai Typeacroosteolysis, NeurogenicHereditary Sensory Neuropathy Type IIHSAN2HSAN IIMorvan disease

overview:
SummaryHereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type II (HSAN2) is a rare genetic disorder that usually begins in childhood, affecting the nerves that serve the lower legs and feet and the lower arms and hands. Symptoms often start with inflamed fingers or toes, especially around the nails. Numbness and tingling sensations in the hands and feet may also occur. Eventually, affected individuals lose feeling (sensation) in their hands and feet. This sensory loss is due to abnormal functioning of the sensory nerves that control responses to pain and temperature and may also affect the autonomic nervous system that controls other involuntary or automatic body processes. Chronic infection of the affected areas is common and worsens as ulcers form on the fingers or the soles of the hands and feet. The loss of sensation in the hands and feet often leads to neglect of the wounds. This can become serious, even leading to amputation in extreme cases if left untreated. In some patients, the motor nervous system may be affected, and spasticity of the arms and legs has been described. The disorder affects many of the body’s systems, is characterized by early onset (infancy or childhood) and follows an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. HSAN2 occurs due to pathogenic changes (variants or mutations) in specific genes. There are a few subtypes designated A through D, each one associated with a different gene.
IntroductionThe hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathies (HSAN), also known as the hereditary sensory neuropathies (HSN), include several similar but distinct inherited inborn or degenerative disorders of the nervous system that frequently progress to loss of feeling, especially in the hands and feet. Some of these disorders have several subtypes based upon the specific associated genes. Some types of HSAN are related to or identical with some forms of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, congenital insensitivity to pain (CIP) and others are related to or identical to familial dysautonomia (Riley-Day syndrome). The classification of the HSANs is complicated, and the experts do not always agree on it. Therefore, a molecular genetic classification should be preferred. Furthermore, HSANs are classified broadly as peripheral neuropathies or disorders of the peripheral nervous system, which predominantly encompasses all the nerves outside of the central nervous system (i.e., brain and spinal cord).

symptoms:
The symptoms of HSNs are highly variable, even among members of the same family. HSNs of various types may attack a single nerve (mononeuropathy) or many nerves simultaneously (polyneuropathy). The resulting symptoms may involve sensory, motor, reflex or blood vessel (vasomotor) function.
Although researchers have been able to establish HSANs as a distinct group of disorders with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about these disorders is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified patients, the lack of large clinical studies and the possibility of other genes influencing the disorder prevent physicians from developing an accurate picture of associated symptoms and prognosis of all subtypes. Many of the reported individuals of HSAN2 are inconsistent in terms of symptomology and progression. This is partially caused by case reports that include cases that are not molecularly confirmed to be HSAN2. Consequently, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all the symptoms discussed below. Parents should talk to their children’s physician and medical team about their specific case, the genetic origin of the disease, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
HSAN2 is characterized by sensory loss of the distal portions of the legs. Distal refers to those areas that are farther from the center of the body and includes the lower arms and legs and the hands and feet. The legs and feet are more severely affected than the arms and hands. Onset is usually shortly after birth or during childhood.
Affected individuals may experience progressive numbness and tingling in their hands and feet. They may also experience reduced sensation to temperature, pain and touch. Eventually, affected individuals will be unable to distinguish between cold or warm stimuli and be unable to feel pain in the affected area. Because of the loss of sensation, affected individuals may develop chronic skin erosions, ulcers (open sores) or blisters that are slow to heal. These normally painful conditions do not hurt because of the loss of sensation. If unrecognized and left untreated, these painless injuries can progress to cause more serious complications such as recurrent infections. Eventually, affected individuals can develop infection of the surrounding bone (osteomyelitis), loss of bone and tissue in the fingers and toes (acroosteolysis), spontaneous, painless fractures and inflammation and damage to the surrounding joints (neuropathic arthropathy).
Most reports describe autonomic problems as less pronounced than sensory abnormalities in individuals with HSAN2. Many affected individuals have sweating abnormalities including episodes of excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis) or reduced sweating (hypohidrosis). Individuals can experience hyperhidrosis along with patchy areas of anhidrosis. Additional autonomic findings include backflow of the stomach contents into the esophagus (gastroesophageal reflux) and low blood pressure upon standing (postural hypotension) causing lightheadedness or dizziness.
Some individuals with HSAN2 exhibit self-mutilation, usually around the time of the eruption of primary teeth. Additional symptoms have been reported in some patients including dry scaly patches on the skin of the palms and soles (hyperkeratosis), diminished taste sensation, diminishment of certain reflexes and abnormal sideways curvature of the spine (scoliosis). Some infants and children may have difficulty swallowing. Sleep apnea, in which breathing slows or stops briefly during sleep, may also occur. Later in the course of the disorder, urinary incontinence or signs of spasticity may develop.

