Hereditary Leiomyomatosis and Renal Cell Carcinoma

synonyms:
HLRCCReed syndrome

overview:
Summary
Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma, also known as HLRCC, is a rare genetic disorder characterized by smooth muscle growths (leiomyomas) on the skin and uterus and an increased risk of developing kidney (renal) cancer. Skin growths may appear as small, firm bumps (papules) or tiny lumps (nodules) and are not cancerous (benign). Uterine leiomyomas, also known as uterine fibroids, may be numerous and are also benign, but can cause symptoms such as heavy menstrual periods or pelvic pressure or pain. Affected individuals are at an increased risk of developing kidney cancer, particularly a form known as type II papillary renal cell carcinoma. Kidney cancer associated with HLRCC is cancerous (malignant) and can be aggressive and spread (metastasize) to other areas of the body. HLRCC is caused by changes (pathogenic variants) in the fumarate hydratase (FH) gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.
Introduction
HLRCC is classified as a hereditary renal cancer syndrome, a group of disorders characterized by a genetic predisposition to renal cancer along with other symptoms. There are at least 10 identified hereditary renal cancer syndromes including Von-Hippel-Lindau disease, Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome and hereditary papillary renal cell carcinoma. The association of leiomyomas and uterine fibroids as a genetic disorder was described in the medical literature by Dr. Reed in 1973 and subsequently termed multiple cutaneous and uterine leiomyoma (MCUL) or Reed’s syndrome. The additional association with renal carcinoma was not established until 2001.

symptoms:
The symptoms and progression of HLRCC can vary widely from one person to another, even among members of the same family. Some individuals who inherit a gene variant for HLRCC will not develop any symptoms. The susceptibility to developing symptoms varies among family members as well. For example, if a parent develops kidney cancer, it does not necessarily mean that an affected child will.
The most common symptom is benign skin lesions called leiomyomas or leiomyomata. Leiomyomas are small growths that are usually skin-colored, brownish or reddish. Sometimes they can resemble a rash. They most often appear on the trunk, arms and legs (extremities) and face. These lesions are sensitive to touch and cold temperatures and, in rare cases, may be painful. Some individuals may have widespread disease, with multiple small leiomyomas covering a large area of the body; other individuals may only develop a few bumps. Some individuals may only have one small skin growth (leiomyoma) or have no detectable growths. Leiomyomas usually become apparent between 10 and 50 years of age (with a mean age of 25) and generally increase in size and number as an affected individual ages.
Females with HLRCC may develop leiomyomas in the uterus (uterine fibroids). These growths are common in females in the general population and often go unnoticed because they do not cause any symptoms (asymptomatic). In females with HLRCC, uterine fibroids are more numerous, larger and have an early age of onset, most often being diagnosed between 18 and 52 years of age (with a mean age of 30). Affected females may have abnormally heavy menstrual periods and feel pelvic pressure or pain. Females with HLRCC tend to undergo a hysterectomy or myomectomy for symptomatic relief at a younger age than females in the general population.
Individuals with HLRCC are at an increased risk of developing kidney (renal) cancer than individuals in the general population. However, most affected individuals do not develop kidney cancer. In individuals who have developed kidney cancer, the most common form has been type II papillary renal cell carcinoma, a potentially aggressive malignant cancer that can spread (metastasize) quickly. Most affected individuals develop a solitary kidney tumor, but even a small primary tumor can spread. Individuals with kidney cancer may not develop any outward symptoms. Symptoms that can develop include blood in the urine (hematuria), lower back pain and the presence of mass that can be felt (palpable). Additional forms of kidney cancer have occurred in individuals with HLRCC including tubulo-papillary and renal collecting duct carcinomas.
In extremely rare cases, some affected females have developed uterine leiomyosarcomas, a malignant tumor that arises from the smooth muscle lining the walls of the uterus (myometrium). (For more information on this disorder, choose “uterine leiomyosarcoma” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
Several other benign and malignant forms of cancer have been described in individuals with HLRCC including breast cancer, bladder cancer, gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs), adrenal incidentaloma, Leydig-cell tumors of the testes and ovarian cystadenomas. However, it is unknown whether these are coincidental findings or somehow related to HLRCC. Variants in theFHgene can be found in people with HLRCC and fumarase deficiency but also in a subset of people with pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma. Nevertheless, it appears that it is uncommon for patients diagnosed with HLRCC to develop a pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma (though this possibility should be considered if there are symptoms such as high blood pressure).

