Hereditary Orotic Aciduria

synonyms:
hereditary orotic aciduriaorotic aciduria type 1OA type 1orotidylic pyrophosphorylase and orotidlyic decarboxylase deficiencyUMPS deficiencyuridine monophosphate synthase deficiency

overview:
Hereditary orotic aciduria is an extremely rare genetic disorder. When untreated, affected infants can develop a blood (hematologic) disorder called megaloblastic anemia as well as failure to thrive, susceptibility to infection, and orotic acid crystals in the urine (crystalluria) resulting from excretion of orotic acid in the urine. Impaired neurological development has been observed, but invariably, especially since a treatment has become available.
Because so few individuals have been identified with this disorder, much about hereditary orotic aciduria is not fully understood. The disorder is caused by variations in theUMPSgene. In 2015, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved a treatment called uridine triacetate (Xuriden) for this disorder.

symptoms:
Some affected infants develop megaloblastic anemia, a condition in which the bone marrow produces unusually large, structurally-abnormal, immature red blood cells (megaloblasts). Megaloblastic anemia usually becomes apparent within the first few months of life.
Some infants and children may have neurological problems including delays in reaching developmental milestones (developmental delays). There may also be delays or issues with intellectual development including mild intellectual disability. Seizures (epilepsy) have been reported in some individuals. Some infants fail to gain weight and grow as they normally would for their age and gender (failure to thrive), but others are normal. As all children grow older, height and weight appear to fall in the normal range.
Sometimes, the urine of people with hereditary orotic aciduria is cloudy because of the presence of orotic acid crystals (crystalluria). These crystals may also play a role in episodes of obstructive uropathy that have can also occur. Obstructive uropathy is a condition in which there is some type of obstruction of the urinary tract, which can cause urine to back up, lead to blood to appear in the urine (hematuria), and other complications.
Other symptoms have been reported in one or two individuals, but researchers are not sure if they are features of the disorder, or if they occurred for other reasons or were coincidental findings. These symptoms include diarrhea, congenital malformations, inflammation of the mouth and lips (stomatitis), and misalignment of the eyes (strabismus). Some affected infants had congenital heart disease, including septal defects. Septal defects are abnormalities in the walls (septum) that separate the lower chambers of the heart (ventricles), or the upper chambers of the heart (atria).

