Hereditary Sensory and Autonomic Neuropathy Type IV

synonyms:
congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis (CIPA)familial dysautonomia, type IIhereditary sensory neuropathy type IVHSAN IVHSNAN4

overview:
Summary
Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type IV (HSAN4 or HSAN IV) is a rare genetic disorder that usually begins in infancy and is characterized by an inability to feel pain and an inability to sweat (anhidrosis). Affected individuals also cannot feel temperature and cannot distinguish between hot and cold. The sensory loss in individuals with HSAN IV is due to abnormal functioning of the sensory nerves that control responses to pain and temperature. Anhidrosis can cause recurrent episodes of fever and high body temperature. An inability to feel pain can lead to unintentional self-mutation, repeated fractures and joint damage. Affected individuals and especially children or infants may be unaware of injury delaying treatment. HSAN IV is caused by changes (variants) in theNTRK1gene. The disorder is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
Introduction
The hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathies (HSAN), also known as the hereditary sensory neuropathies, include distinct inherited degenerative disorders of the nervous system (neurodegenerative) that frequently progress to loss of feeling, especially in the hands and feet. Some of these disorders have several subtypes based upon the specific associated genes and variants in about 20 genes have been identified as disease-causative. Some types of HSAN are related to or identical with some forms of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease and others are related to or identical with familial dysautonomia (Riley-Day syndrome). The classification of the HSANs is complicated, and the experts do not always agree on it. Furthermore, HSANs are classified more broadly as peripheral neuropathies or disorders or the peripheral nervous system, which encompasses all the nerves outside of the central nervous system (i.e. brain and spinal cord). HSAN IV is also known as congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis (CIPA).

symptoms:
Infants with HSAN IV cannot sweat or have a markedly decreased ability to sweat (anhidrosis). Sweating is the body’s way of cooling itself and maintaining proper body temperature. The inability to sweat can cause recurrent episodes of fever including extremely high fevers that result in a significant elevation of body temperature (hyperpyrexia). When someone has a significantly increased body temperature it is known as hyperthermia, and this can be the initial sign of the disorder. The inability to sweat can affect the entire body, but the trunk and arms are mostly affected. Seizures are sometimes associated with fever episodes. The skin may become abnormally thickened and callused with an exaggeration of normal skin lines (lichenification). There may be areas of hair loss of the scalp (hypotrichosis) and malformation of the fingernails and toenails.
Affected infants fail to feel pain in response to stimuli that normally should produce pain such as failing to respond to routine injections that are part of pediatric immunizations. Pain is essential to protect people from injury and to alert the body of injury. Because of the inability to feel pain, affected infants and children may suffer repeated injuries and may have behaviors that cause injury to themselves (self-mutilation) including biting one’s tongue, lips and the lining of the inside of the mouth (buccal mucosa). Affected infants often develop ulcers on their tongues from repeatedly biting their tongues. When the primary teeth first erupt, affected children often bite their fingertips or toes; in severe cases, they can chew or bite off the tips of their fingers or toes.
Affected individuals will be unable to distinguish between cold or warm stimuli and be unable to feel pain in the affected area. Because of the loss of sensation, affected individuals may be unaware of injury. For example, affected individuals may develop chronic skin erosions, ulcers (open sores) or blisters that are slow to heal. These normally painful conditions do not hurt because of the loss of sensation. If unrecognized and left untreated, these painless injuries can progress to cause more serious complications such as recurrent infections. Eventually, affected individuals can develop infection of the surrounding bone (osteomyelitis), loss of bone and tissue in the fingers and toes (acroosteolysis) and spontaneous, repeated fractures. Repeated trauma to joints results in progressive inflammation, damage and deformity of the affected joints (Charcot joint or neuropathic arthropathy). The large, weight-bearing joints are especially prone to this complication.
Children with HSAN IV may show delays in attaining developmental milestones (developmental delays) and learning disabilities are common. Intellectual disability has been reported in some people, but the severity varies widely, and some children are only mildly affected. Behavioral problems including irritability, hyperactivity, inability to control one’s emotions (emotional lability) and episodes of anger or rage have also been reported.
Diminished muscle tone (hypotonia) may be present at birth or during infancy. Hypotonia, also known as a “floppy baby,” may cause affected infants to be abnormally limp. Although hypotonia is common at birth, strength and tone improves with age.
Some individuals experience postural hypotension, a condition in which there is a drop in blood pressure upon a change in body position such as upon standing. Sometimes, postural hypotension is accompanied by a faster than normal heart rate (compensatory tachycardia), in which the body attempts to compensate for the decreased blood pressure.
Eye abnormalities may develop, specifically neurotrophic keratitis, a condition characterized by damage to the corneas of the eyes. The cornea is the transparent membrane that covers the front of the eyes. Affected individuals can develop lesions (ulcerations) on the cornea; these lesions can cause corneal scarring. Infection can also occur.

