Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome

synonyms:
HBOCHBOC syndrome

overview:
Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) syndrome is an inherited cancer-predisposition syndrome. Affected individuals have a significantly greater risk of developing certain cancers, particularly breast cancer, in both men and women, and ovarian cancer in women. Affected individuals tend to develop cancer earlier in life as well, usually before the age of 50. Additionally, to a lesser degree, there is also an increased risk of developing other types of cancer including prostrate cancer, melanoma, and pancreatic cancer. HBOC syndrome is most commonly associated with variations (mutations) in the either theBRCA1gene or theBRCA2gene. In HBOC syndrome, there is usually a family history of cancer and the variant gene is inherited. The underlying causes of cancer are not completely understood and while inheriting a variation in theBRCA1orBRCA2gene greatly increases a person’s risk of developing certain cancers, it does not mean that the people will definitely develop cancer. Some people with variations in these genes never develop cancer. How these gene variants affect individuals and families will be different. Most likely, there are additional genetic (e.g. variations in other genes) or environmental factors (e.g. smoking) that influence whether and how cancer develops.
Most forms of cancer develop sporadically. When cancer occurs sporadically, it is usually because of aging and other factors besides genetics. With sporadic cancer, there is a single occurrence of that form of cancer in the family and the affected person is usually older (often more than 60 years old). Sometimes, cancer is familial. This means that two or more first-degree relatives have the same type of cancer. Cancer usually develops after the age of 50 and there are several, moderate-to-minor genetic factors involved.  In addition, there is often an environment factor or factors as well. HBOC syndrome is a genetic disorder in which multiple members in multiple generations are affected. Cancer often develops before the age of 50. The affected family members have a variation in a single major cancer susceptibility gene, most often theBRCA1orBRCA2gene.

symptoms:
HBOC syndrome is a cancer predisposition syndrome in which individuals are at a greater risk of developing certain cancers, particularly breast or ovarian cancer. Signs and symptoms are associated with the development of cancer, and depend upon the type and location of cancer. HBOC syndrome can cause cancer in multiple family members over several generations in one family. It can also be associated with more than one cancer in the same person.
The exact percentage of risk for specific types of cancer in HBOC syndrome varies greatly depending on the specific gene that is altered and the specific alteration (i.e. mutation). Some people with a variation in these genes will never develop cancer. Female breast cancer is the most common type of cancer associated with a variation in theBRCA1orBRCA2genes. The risk for breast in the general population is about 12%, but for women with aBRCA1gene variation it can be between 46%-87%, and between 38%-84% for women with aBRCA2variation. There is also an increased risk of having a second primary breast cancer.
In HBOC syndrome, ovarian cancer includes cancer of the fallopian tubes. Primary peritoneal cancers can also occur. These are cancers that develop in the thin layer of tissue that lines the abdomen (peritoneum). The risk for ovarian cancer in the general population is about 1%-2%, but about 39%-63% withBRCA1gene variations and 16.5%-27% withBRCA2variations.
There is an increased risk for male breast cancer, which affects about .1% of the population. In men with aBRCA1gene variation, there is a 1.2% risk and an 8.9% risk in men with aBRCA2gene variation. In general, the relative risk for male breast cancer is greatest in men in their 30s and 40s and decreases with advancing age.
There is a risk of prostate cancer of 6% before the age of 69 in the general population. There is an 8.9% by 65 years of age in men with aBRCA1variation and a 15% risk by age 65 in men with aBRCA2variation. The lifetime risk for prostate cancer is about 20%-25%.
The risk of pancreatic cancer in the general population is about .5%. With aBRCA1variation the risk is about 1%-3%, and with aBRCA2variation the risk is about 2%-7%.
Other cancers including melanoma, cervical and uterine cancer have all been reported as having higher rates in affected individuals. Further studies are needed to confirm which additional cancers are definitively associated with variations in these genes.

