Hereditary Sensory Neuropathy Type I

synonyms:
hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy (HSAN) type Ihereditary sensory radicular neuropathy, autosomal dominantHSAN1HSN1

overview:
Summary
Hereditary sensory neuropathy type I (HSN1) belongs to a group of similar but distinct genetic disorders characterized by abnormalities affecting the nerves, especially of those of the hands and feet. These degenerative disorders of the nervous system (neurodegenerative disorders) are slowly progressive and predominantly affect the sensory nerves, which frequently leads to loss of feeling (sensation) in the hands and feet. This sensory loss is due to abnormal functioning of the sensory nerves that control responses to touch, pain and temperature and may also affect the autonomic nervous system that controls other involuntary or automatic body processes. Specific symptoms can vary widely from one person to another. HSN1 occurs due to mutations in specific genes and is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. There are several subtypes of HSN1 designated A through F, each one associated with a different gene.
Introduction
The hereditary sensory neuropathies (HSNs), also known as the hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathies, include at least six similar, but distinct inherited degenerative disorders of the nervous system (neurodegenerative) that frequently progress to loss of feeling, especially in the hands and feet. Some of these disorders have several subtypes based upon the specific associated genes. The classification of the HSNs is complicated, and the experts do not always agree on it. Furthermore, HSNs are classified more broadly as peripheral neuropathies or disorders of the peripheral nervous system, which encompasses all of the nerves outside of the central nervous system. NORD’s Rare Disease Database has separate reports on HSN2, HSN3 (which is related to or identical to familial dysautonomia), HSN4, and HSAN1E. New genes are frequently identified so the classification is constantly being updated.
The HSNs are similar to the related disorders Charcot Marie Tooth disease (CMT) and hereditary motor neuropathy (HMN) and this group of disorders is commonly referred to as CMT and related disorders. HSN predominantly affects the sensory nerves whereas CMT affects the sensory and motor nerves and HMN predominantly the motor nerves. There is overlap in the causative genes for these three related disorders.

symptoms:
The symptoms of the HSNs are highly variable, even among members of the same family. HSNs of various types usually involve many nerves simultaneously (polyneuropathy). The resulting symptoms may involve sensory, motor, reflex or blood vessel (vasomotor) function.
Although researchers have been able to establish HSNs as a distinct group of disorders with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about these disorders is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified patients, the lack of large clinical studies, and the possibility of other genes influencing the disorder prevent physicians from developing an accurate picture of associated symptoms and prognosis for all subtypes although the main features of each subtype are well described. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Parents should talk to their own or their children’s physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis. It is also important to note that more than 50% of the causative genes have yet to be identified for the HSNs so many patients will receive a diagnosis of HSN without a specific genetic cause being identified.
The symptoms described below are common in individuals with HSN1A the best known form of HSN. Some symptoms such as progressive distal sensory loss are characteristic of all forms of HSN. Certain symptoms are associated with specific subtypes. HSN1A and HSN1C and a form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth, CMT2B, are all very similar but patients with HSN1A and HSN1C have more neuropathic pain and patients with CMT2B have less pain but more motor involvement at an early stage of the disease. Individuals with HSN1B often do not have foot ulcers, but may experience gastroesophageal reflux and cough in adulthood. HSN1D is caused by a gene, ATL1, which more commonly causes a central nervous system disease called hereditary spastic paraparesis (HSP) and those patients who get HSN1D often have central nervous system signs such as brisk reflexes. HSN1F is a due to a related gene ATL3. HSN1E is a late onset disease with a mean age of onset of 37 years. It presents with a triad of symptoms: hearing loss, sensory neuropathy, and cognitive decline (dementia) but it can also present with only one or two of triad.
Sensory loss of the distal portions of the legs is the characteristic finding of the HSNs. Distal refers to those areas that are farther from the center of the body and includes the lower arms and hands and the lower legs and feet. Onset can be anywhere from childhood to the sixth decade although HSN1 does not usually present before the teenage years. The characteristic finding of the HSNs is loss of sensation in the lower portions of the arms and legs, especially the hands and feet. The feet are nearly always involved first as these are further from the center of the body than the hands. Affected individuals will be unable to distinguish between cold or warm stimuli and be unable to feel touch or pain normally in the affected areas. Because of the loss of sensation, affected individuals may develop chronic skin erosions, ulcers (open sores), or blisters that are slow to heal. Patients frequently do not realize they have injured themselves until they see the damage as they often do not feel such damage occurring e.g. putting their feet against a heater. These normally painful conditions do not hurt because of the loss of sensation. If unrecognized and left untreated, these painless injuries can progress to cause more serious complications such as recurrent infections. Eventually, affected individuals can develop infection of the surrounding bone (osteomyelitis), bone loss (osteonecrosis), spontaneous fractures, and inflammation and damage to the surrounding joints (neuropathic arthropathy). Severe cases may eventually require amputation.
Although sensory loss and numbness is the characteristic feature of the HSNs, some affected individuals, especially those with HSNIA or HSN1C may develop sensory symptoms such as burning or tingling sensations in the hands or feet. Some individuals may experience spontaneous shooting pains in the feet, legs, hands or shoulders.
Some affected individuals may have deformities of the feet such as highly arched feet (pes cavus), flat feet (pes planus), or hammertoes. Recurrent fungal or bacterial infections of the toenails (onchymocosis or paronychia) may also occur.
Muscle weakness and muscle wasting can occur in some affected individuals, although these findings are highly variable and usually occur after the sensory symptoms. In rare cases, muscle weakness in the hands and feet can be the initial sign of HSN. Muscle weakness usually begins in the lower legs and then the lower arms. Progress is usually slow, but in severe cases, muscle weakness can progress to affect the proximal portions of the arms and legs. Proximal refers to those areas that are nearer to the center of the body such as the upper portions of the arms and legs. Muscle weakness can cause weak ankles and eventually progress to difficulty walking (gait disturbances). Some older affected individuals (e.g. those in their 60s or 70s) may eventually require a wheelchair.
Sensorineural hearing loss, which is caused by an impaired ability of the auditory nerves to transmit sensory input to the brain, has rarely been associated with HSN1A. Onset of hearing loss is usually in middle to late adulthood.
Some individuals with HSNs develop sweating abnormalities such as excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis), reduced sweating (hypohidrosis) or lack of sweating (anhidrosis). The hands and feet are most often affected. Less often, additional autonomic findings may occur such as low blood pressure (hypotension). All of these symptoms are extremely rare with HSN1 and are more common with some of the other forms of HSN.

