Hereditary Neuralgic Amyotrophy

synonyms:
hereditary brachial plexus neuropathyHNA

overview:
Summary
Hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy (HNA) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by recurrent episodes of severe pain in the shoulder and arm. In most cases, pain may persist for a few hours to a few weeks and is followed by wasting and weakness of the muscles (amyotrophy) in the affected areas. Additional symptoms including distinct facial features and skeletal abnormalities may also be present. HNA involves the brachial plexus, the interweaving network of nerves that extend from the spine through the neck, into each armpit and down the arms. These nerves control movements and sensations in the shoulders, arms, elbows, wrists and hands. They also control the opening and closing of small blood vessels in the skin, as in response to outside temperature. The number and frequency of episodes can vary greatly from one person to another. Approximately, 75% of affected individuals will have at least one recurrent episode. The severity of the disorder can also vary greatly due, in part, to the specific nerves involved. HNA may result in residual pain even between episodes and many individuals develop persistent pain due to altered posture and movement, and overuse of the affected shoulder and arm. Some patients have an inherited predisposition to developing HNA that is associated with changes (mutations) or duplications in theSEPT9gene. The trait for developing NA symptoms is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.

symptoms:
The hallmark finding is the abrupt onset of pain in one or both of the shoulders and/or arms. The right side of the body is affected more often than the left, but both shoulders are affected in approximately one-third of patients. When both shoulders are affected, symptoms are usually worse on one side.
In the classic type, onset may be rapid in some patients, while in others pain onset is gradual and subtle (insidious), followed by a rapid increase in both intensity and severity. Pain has been described as sharp, aching, burning or stabbing. If patients rate the severity of their pain at onset on a scale from 0 (no pain) to 10 (most severe pain ever), they usually score a 7 or higher. Pain may also affect the neck and the arm, and hand on the same side as the affected shoulder.
Onset is usually in the second or third decade of life. However, children as young as one year old have experienced recurrent episodes of HNA. Recurrent episodes may involve the same peripheral nerves that were originally affected, completely different peripheral nerves, or a mix of the same and different peripheral nerves.
Pain at onset is often continuous, severe, and worse during the evening or at night. Pain can potentially be excruciating and debilitating and typically lasts for 1-3 weeks on average; although in some patients it may be longer. This initial period may be known as the acute phase. Eventually, affected individuals enter a period where the continuous pain lessens and there may be no pain when the affect shoulder and/or arm are not being used (i.e. at rest). However, specific movements may aggravate the condition, causing sharp, stabbing intense pain that persists for a few hours before lessening. This occurs because previously damaged nerves remain abnormally sensitive (hypersensitive). Eventually, around 2/3 of all affected individuals develop a chronic, more muscle ache type pain that can persist indefinitely. This is sometimes known as the chronic phase of HNA.
Eventually, anywhere from a day to a few weeks after the onset of the disorder, a progressive weakness of several muscles in the affected shoulder and arm occurs. The severity of muscle weakness can vary greatly, ranging from mild weakness that may be barely noticeable to, in rare cases, almost complete paralysis of some affected muscles. In individuals with HNA, muscle weakness results from damage to the nerves that serve the muscles in the shoulders and arms. The degree of weakness is related to the number of nerve fibers affected in a nerve. In addition to weakness, the affected muscles may progressively shrink and thin (atrophy) due to lack of use. Muscle weakness may go unnoticed, unless atrophy and wasting of the affected muscles are severe and easy to observe, or when the person affected notices he or she can’t use the arm as well as before, especially during reaching or in overhead activities.
Additional symptoms that can occur in HNA include absent or reduced reflexes and sensory deficits in the affected areas such as the loss of sensation or numbness (hypoesthesia), a sensation of tickling, prickling, or burning on the skin of the affected areas (paresthesia), or an abnormally unpleasant or painful sensation to a light touch (dysesthesia). These symptoms mainly occur when nerves that supply the forearm and hand are involved.
Because nerve damage in HNA can affect blood vessel constriction, additional symptoms may develop including affected skin, particularly on the hands, becoming reddened, purplish or spotted. Swelling due to fluid retention (edema) may also occur. The skin, hair and nails may grow quickly than normal. Certain areas of the body particularly the hands and forearms may no longer be able to respond properly to outside temperature. Excessive sweating may occur or affected individuals may feel abnormally cold in the affected areas. Just as the sensory symptoms, these so-called autonomic nerve symptoms occur mainly occur in the forearms and hands.
Additional complications can develop in some affected individuals. The position of the shoulders, arms, wrists, and hands can shift slightly because of atrophy and weakness of affected muscles. The most common finding is a combination of an abnormally moving shoulder blade, a decreased ability to extend the arm behind the back and some weakness in bending the tip of the thumb. The weakness and limitations of movement find their origin in the so-calledserratus anteriormuscle. This muscle is responsible for holding the shoulder blade close to the chest when someone is upright or trying to lift the arm. The nerve to this muscle is affected in around 70% of people with HNA. Weakness of theserratus anteriorleads to loss of contact of the shoulder blade with the chest. As a result, the shoulder blade will protrude backwards during movement of the arm. This is called a winged scapula, orscapula alata. This can leave an affected individual at risk of secondary shoulder joint impingement or subluxation. Secondary impingement is a painful condition that occurs when the shoulder’s tendons are compressed or trapped during shoulder movements. Because the shoulder blade also forms the socket of the shoulder joint, it needs to rotate during movement of the arm to hold the socket and the upper arm bone neatly together without impinging tendons in the joint. If weakness causes this rotation to fail, the shoulder joint tendons will often become irritated as they are constantly impinged during movement of the arm. Subluxation refers to partial dislocation of the shoulder joint, which occurs when the muscle that supports the weight of the arm in the joint socket (thedeltoidmuscle) is too weak. Fortunately the arm will not completely luxate as a rule, because this type of weakness of this deltoid muscle automatically means people cannot lift their arm higher than elbow height, and hence cannot luxate the joint. Affected individuals may also be at risk of developing contractures, in which abnormal shortening of muscles or tendons leads to deformity or rigidity of an affected joint. Contracture of the shoulder, also known as adhesive capsulitis, can result in pain and limitation of normal range of movement of the joint.
In some patients, nerves outside of the brachial plexus may be involved such as the nerves of the lumbosacral plexus (the nerves to the leg and foot), the phrenic nerve that supplies the main muscle for inspiration, or rarely the recurrent laryngeal nerve that supplies half of the vocal cords. Involvement of the nerves in the lower portion of the back (lumbosacral plexus) can cause pain, hypoesthesia, and paresthesia in the legs. The phrenic nerve sends signals between the brain and the diaphragm, the muscle that separates the lungs from the abdomen. Involvement of the phrenic nerve can result in a significant shortness of breath, especially when lying down or bending over and in trouble sleeping well. Involvement of the recurrent laryngeal nerve can result in weakness and partial paralysis of the vocal cords and, consequently, hoarseness and soft speech (hypophonia). In extremely rare cases, facial or other cranial nerves may be affected.
Many individuals recover some strength and functionality of the shoulder or other affected areas. Numerous reports in the medical literature state that most individuals will regain up to 70%-90% of their original strength within two years. However, strength recovery does not automatically mean recovery of function in HNA. Recent studies indicate that recovery may take more than two years in some people, and may even take up to 3-4 years for phrenic nerve recovery. Many people will experience residual, chronic pain and complications such as impaired movement of the shoulder and/or affected joints. It is now known that these residual complaints have no relation with the strength of individual muscles anymore. There are two reasons that pain and fatigue may persist. The first reason is a loss of endurance, i.e. the ability to keep up a certain position or movement with a previously affected muscle. Decreased endurance is the price our body has to pay for how nerves are healed. It is the main reason why patients with (hereditary) NA can often not go back to a full day of work or home duties. The second reason is the changed, adaptive, posture and movement pattern that occurs after nerves have been damaged around the shoulder. These new movements that were initially less or lost causes every movement to cost more energy than the “normal” movement did, and can lead to significant fatigue. The pattern is also mechanically less healthy for your body and can lead to secondary injury to the shoulder joint and tendons. The resulting imbalance between one’s physical possibilities and what is required of someone in his or her daily life and work often leads to chronic pain and fatigue.
In a small subset of individuals, HNA can also be associated with specific features or physical findings. Some affected individuals have distinctive facial features including deep-set eyes that are set abnormally close together (hypotelorism), skin folds that cover the inner corner of the eyes (epicanthal folds), an abnormally narrow distance between the eyelids (narrow palpebral fissures), a long bridge of the nose, a narrow, small mouth (microstomia), low-set ears, and wide-set teeth. Hypotelorism can be striking in some cases. Affected individuals may also display features that appear dissimilar from one side of the face to the other (facial asymmetry). Distinctive facial features usually become less pronounced with age. In these cases, additional physical findings can be present including partial webbing or fusion of the fingers or toes (partial syndactyly), hammer toes, fused bones in the forearms, and excess skin folds on the neck, a groove or gap in the roof of the mouth (cleft palate), and a cleft or split in the fleshy flap of tissue (uvula) that hangs in the back of the throat (bifid uvula). Short stature has also occurred in these individuals. However, on an individual level, there is no sure tell-sign that someone has hereditary NA versus the non-hereditary variant, unless there are other people affected in the same family.

