Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia

synonyms:
HHTOsler-Weber Rendu syndromeRendu-Osler-Weber syndrome

overview:
Summary
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT or Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome) is an inherited disorder characterized by malformations of various blood vessels (vascular dysplasia), potentially resulting in bleeding (hemorrhaging) and shunting of blood. Chronic nosebleeds are often the first sign and malformation of various blood vessels may result in abnormalities affecting the lungs, brain, spinal cord and liver. A variety of treatments exist for the various features of HHT to improve quality of life and prevent life-threatening complications. With appropriate treatment, individuals with HHT can expect a near-normal life expectancy. HHT is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.
Introduction
HHT was first described by Henry Gawen Sutton in 1864. With similar symptoms to hemophilia, the two diseases were differentiated by Henri Jules Louis Marie Rendu in 1896. William Osler connected the disease’s presence in families to establish it as an inherited disorder. In 1907 Frederick Parkes Weber continued the characterization of the disease, writing a report on a series of cases. In 1909, the name “hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia” was coined, but alternate names based on the scientists who first characterized it have also been commonly used. Since its first identification, HHT has been an underdiagnosed disease, affecting more than a million people worldwide.

symptoms:
The symptoms associated with HHT vary from person to person. Differences in disease expression (phenotype) partially reflect the specific gene that is mutated in HHT.  Phenotypic penetrance is age dependent with approximately 90% showing signs or symptoms by age 40-45 years. Some individuals may experience symptoms during infancy or early childhood; others may show few signs or symptoms until the thirties, forties or later in life.
In many patients, the first apparent symptom of HHT is nosebleeds (epistaxis). While recurrent nosebleeds may develop as early as infancy they most often begin around puberty. Recurrent nosebleeds occur in approximately 90% of affected individuals. Nosebleeds occur because of the formation of small, fragile vascular malformations (telangiectases) in the mucous membranes lining the inside of the nose. Telangiectases occur when capillaries fail to develop between arterioles and venules and most often affect the skin and the mucous membranes. The tongue, lips, face, ears, and fingers are the areas most often affected. Telangiectases may develop at any age including during infancy, but usually become apparent during adolescence and later.
Telangiectases also occur in the gastrointestinal tract. Gastrointestinal bleeding (hemorrhaging), which affects about 25-30%, usually does not present until the fourth decade of life or later. Affected individuals with gastrointestinal bleeding may note dark stools – sometimes black and tarry (melena) – but only rarely do they have red blood in their stools (hematochezia) or vomit (hematemesis). Commonly, blood loss is not detected by the patient, even when it leads to anemia.
Because bleeding episodes become more severe with age, they often lead to chronically low levels of iron in the blood and eventually to a low red blood cell count (anemia). Anemia may result in chest pain, shortness of breath, and/or fatigue. Gastrointestinal bleeding can often be slow, chronic and intermittent, with few noticeable symptoms until the onset of anemia.
Many individuals with HHT develop arteriovenous malformations (AVMs).  AVMs, which are direct connections between blood vessels of larger caliber than in telangiectases, most commonly affect the lungs, brain, spinal cord, and liver.  In recent years AVM have been noted in the pancreas, kidneys, and other organs, though they rarely cause complications in these locations.
Pulmonary AVMs (PAVM) are seen in about 50% of individuals with HHT and are often asymptomatic. However, they may result in fatigue, difficulty breathing (dyspnea), episodes of coughing up of blood (hemoptysis), headaches, abnormal bluish discoloration of the skin due to low levels of circulating oxygen in the blood (cyanosis) and/or abnormally increased levels of red cells in the blood (polycythemia). Serious neurological complications, including brain abscess and stroke, may occur due to passage of blood clots or bacteria through a PAVM.
AVMs of the brain occur in about 10% of individuals with HHT and may result in headache, dizziness (vertigo), and seizures. In rare cases, individuals with AVMs of the brain may experience vision and hearing problems such as double vision (diplopia). However, usually they are asymptomatic prior to a hemorrhagic event. AVMs affecting the spinal cord (approximately 1% of those with HHT) are less common and may result in pain in the back and/or loss of feeling or functions of the arms and legs.
Liver vascular malformations are seen in up to 75% of individuals with HHT. In most cases they remain asymptomatic, though over time 10-20% may develop liver or heart failure. Individuals may experience high blood pressure in the veins carrying blood from the gastrointestinal tract back to the heart through the liver (portal hypertension) and abnormalities of the bile ducts (biliary disease). The bile ducts are narrow tubes through which bile passes from the liver to the first section of the small intestine. Pressure on bile ducts from enlarged blood vessels may result in failure of bile to flow to the small intestine, instead becoming trapped in the liver, resulting in yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes (jaundice).
Shunting of blood through liver AVM may result in excessive blood flow through the liver. Over time, high output heart failure may occur because the heart is forced to work harder to compensate for the extra blood flow through the liver, in addition to the normal blood flow to the rest of the body.

