Hereditary Coproporphyria

synonyms:
HCP

overview:
Summary
Hereditary coproporphyria (HCP) is a rare metabolic disorder characterized by deficiency of the enzyme coproporphyrinogen oxidase. This enzyme deficiency results in the accumulation of porphyrin precursors in the body. This enzyme deficiency is caused by a mutation in the CPOX gene. However, the deficiency by itself is not sufficient to produce symptoms of the disease and most individuals with a CPOX gene mutation do not develop symptoms of HCP. Additional factors such as endocrine factors (e.g. hormonal changes), the use of certain drugs, excess alcohol consumption, infections, and fasting or dietary changes are required to trigger the appearance of symptoms. Some affected individuals experience acute attacks or episodes that develop over a period of days. The course and severity of attacks is highly variable from one person to another. In some cases, particularly those without proper diagnosis and treatment, the disorder can cause life-threatening complications. The CPOX mutation is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait.
Introduction
HCP belongs to a group of disorders known as the porphyrias. This group is characterized by abnormally high levels of porphyrin precursors and, in many cases, porphyrins, due to deficiency of certain enzymes essential to the creation (synthesis) of heme, a part of hemoglobin and other hemoproteins. There are eight enzymes in the pathway for making heme and at least eight major forms of porphyria. The symptoms associated with the various forms of porphyria differ. It is important to note that people who have one type of porphyria do not develop any of the other types. Porphyrias are generally classified into two groups: the hepatic and erythropoietic types. Porphyrins and porphyrin precursors and related substances originate in excess amounts predominantly from the liver in the hepatic types and mostly from the bone marrow in the erythropoietic types. Porphyrias with skin manifestations are sometimes referred to as cutaneous porphyrias. The term acute porphyria is used to describe porphyrias that can be associated with sudden attacks of pain and other neurological symptoms. Most forms of porphyria are genetic inborn errors of metabolism. HCP is an acute, hepatic form of porphyria.

symptoms:
The episodes or “attacks” that characterize HCP usually develop over the course of several hours or a few days. Affected individuals usually recover from an attack within days. However, if an acute attack is not diagnosed and treated promptly recovery can take much longer, even weeks or months. Most affected individuals do not exhibit any symptoms in between episodes. Onset of attacks usually occurs in the 20s or 30s, but may occur at or just after puberty. Onset before puberty is extremely rare. Attacks are more common in women than men.
Intermittent, recurrent body pain, usually affecting the abdomen and the lower back may occur chronically. Pain in these areas is often the initial sign of an attack. Pain usually begins as low-grade, vague pain in the abdomen and slowly over a few days worsens eventually causing severe abdominal pain. Pain may radiate to affect the lower back, neck, buttocks, or arms and legs. Pain is usually not well localized, but in some cases can be mistaken for inflammation of the gallbladder, appendix or another intra-abdominal organ. In a minority of cases, pain primarily affects the back and the arms and legs and is usually described as deep and aching. Abdominal pain is often described as colicky and is usually associated with nausea and vomiting. Vomiting may be severe enough that affected individuals vomit after eating or drinking any food or liquid. The absence of bowel sounds (ileus), which indicates a lack of intestinal activity may be noted. Constipation may also occur and can be severe (obstipation). Affected individuals may also experience a faster than normal heart rate (tachycardia), high blood pressure (hypertension), irregular heartbeats (cardiac arrhythmias), and a sudden fall in blood pressure upon standing (orthostatic hypotension). Hypertension may persist in between acute attacks.
Neurologic symptoms, including seizures, may be associated with HCP. In some cases, new-onset seizures may be the initial sign of the disorder. Abnormally low sodium levels in the blood (hyponatremia) may occur during an attack and contribute to the onset of seizures. Affected individuals may also develop damage to the nerves in the extremities (peripheral neuropathy). Peripheral neuropathy may be preceded by the loss of deep tendon reflexes. Peripheral neuropathy is characterized by numbness or tingling and burning sensations that, in HCP, usually begin in the upper legs and arms. Affected individuals may develop muscle weakness initially in the feet and legs that progresses to affect and paralyze all extremities and the body trunk (motor paralysis) and the respiratory muscles (respiratory paralysis and failure).
This ascending paralysis in HCP can mimic the ascending paralysis seen in Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), a disorder in which the body’s immune system attacks the nerves. Differentiating HCP from GBS is extremely important to ensure prompt treatment of HCP and the avoidance of medications that can precipitate or worsen an acute attack. (For more information on GBS, see the Related Disorders section of this report.)
Some individuals develop psychological symptoms, although such symptoms are highly variable. Such symptoms can include irritability, depression, anxiety, and insomnia. Less often, more acute psychiatric symptoms can develop including hallucinations, paranoia, disorientation, mental confusion, delirium, and psychosis.
In some cases, affected individuals may develop skin (cutaneous) lesions affecting the sun-exposed areas of skin such as the hands and face. Affected individuals may develop severe pain, burning, and itching of such areas (photosensitivity). Eventually, the skin may become fragile and develop fluid-filled blisters (bullae). Affected areas may also exhibit darkly discolored (hyperpigmented) scars and excessive hair growth.

