Hereditary Hyperphosphatasia

synonyms:
chronic congenital idiopathic hyperphosphatasemiafamilial idiopathic hyperphosphatasiafamilial osteoectasiahyperostosis corticalis deformans juvenilisjuvenile Paget's disease

overview:
Hereditary hyperphosphatasia is a rare genetic bone disorder (osteopathy) that usually becomes apparent during infancy or early childhood. Affected individuals develop progressive skeletal malformations especially in the long bones of the arms and legs. Skeletal malformations in the legs may cause problems walking and may eventually result in short stature. Additional symptoms include pain, fractures of affected bones and muscle weakness. Because the biochemical and radiographic findings of hereditary hyperphosphatasia are similar to those of Paget’s disease (a focal skeletal disorder of adults characterized by abnormal bone turnover), the disorder is sometimes referred to as juvenile Paget’s disease. However, despite these similarities, the two disorders are distinct. Hereditary hyperphosphatasia is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.

symptoms:
The severity of symptoms associated with hereditary hyperphosphatasia varies from patient to patient. Symptoms usually become apparent during infancy or early childhood usually between 2 and 3 years of age. Most individuals develop widening and bowing of the long bones of the legs eventually resulting in problems walking and short stature. Thickening of the upper domelike portion of the skull (calvaria) is another common finding.
Additional symptoms include pain, fractures of affected bones, abnormal front-to-back and side-to-side curvature of the spine (kyphoscoliosis) and muscle weakness. Deafness is common – it arises because of an impaired ability of the auditory nerves to transmit input to the brain (sensorineural hearing loss).
Ocular manifestations including optic nerve pallor, angioid streaks and retinal neovacularization may become evident in adolescence. Aneurysms of the internal carotid arteries and calcification of the external part of the ears (pinnae) have also been described.
Laboratory findings include greatly elevated bone turnover markers (such as plasma alkaline phosphatase).

