Hermansky Pudlak Syndrome

synonyms:
albinism with hemorrhagic diathesis and pigmented reticuloendothelial cellsdelta storage pool diseaseHPSsyndromic albinism

overview:
Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS) is a rare, hereditary disorder that consists of decreased pigmentation (albinism) with visual impairment, and blood platelet dysfunction with prolonged bleeding. Some individuals have lung fibrosis, inflammatory bowel disease, immunodeficiency or an abnormal storage of a fatty-like substance (ceroid lipofuscin) in various tissues of the body.

symptoms:
The first symptoms of HPS often include easy bruising, bleeding gums, nose bleeds and excessive bleeding after surgery or accidents. The classic symptoms of Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome include the lack of color (pigmentation) in the skin, hair, and eyes (oculocutaneousalbinism) and dysfunction of blood platelets leading to prolonged bleeding (storage pool-deficient platelets).
The skin, hair and eyes of a person with HPS may vary in color from very pale to almost normal coloring. Eyesight is almost always impaired, commonly with visual acuities of 20/100 or worse (i.e., legally blind). The blood platelet abnormality may cause excessive bleeding, especially in women during menstruation, and with trauma or surgery. Bleeding may become life-threatening, and blood thinning medications can make the bleeding worse. Approximately one-sixth of individuals with HPS develop inflammatory bowel disease, with pain and bloody diarrhea. Individuals with type 1, type 2, or type 4 HPS (see below) develop a lung disease called pulmonary fibrosis that can lead to death in the thirties, forties or fifties. In addition, patients with HPS type 2 and type 10 can have an immunodeficiency that can present with different severities, from mild recurrent bacterial and viral infections to a life-threatening condition called hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH).
The deposits of fatty-like ceroid lipofuscin may occur within the cells of many organs such as the lungs, colon, heart and kidneys. This by itself is not known to cause symptoms.

