Herpes, Neonatal

synonyms:
Herpes Simplex Infection of NewbornHerpesvirus Hominis Infection of Newborn

overview:
Neonatal herpes is a rare disorder affecting newborn infants infected with the herpes simplex virus (HSV), also called herpesvirus hominis. In most instances, a parent with oral or genital herpes transfers the disorder to an offspring before, during, or shortly after birth. Symptoms vary from mild to severe depending on which of two types of herpes simplex virus is involved. Type 1 HSV is responsible for the more severe cases of the disorder while patients with Type 2 HSV usually present with milder symptoms.
Another way of classifying this disorder depends on probable outcomes (prognosis). Using prognosis as the classifying principal yields three forms:
disseminated neonatal herpes infectioncentral nervous sytem herpes in the neonatemucocutaneous and ocular herpes

symptoms:
Disseminated Neonatal Herpes Infection (about 25% of cases)
In this form, the disorder spreads to involve organs throughout the body.
Viral infections may spread to the lungs (pneumonitis), the liver (hepatitis), or the circulatory system (disseminated intravascular coagulation) that may lead to infections of the brain covering (encephalitis), rashes on the skin (exanthem), and inflammation of the cornea and the tissue surrounding it (keratoconjunctivitis).
The disorder usually becomes obvious between 9 and 11 days after birth.  However, presentation may be delayed for as long as 30 days.
Central Nervous Sytem Herpes in the Neonate (about 35% of cases)
This form is usually indicated by irritability, seizures, spiking temperatures (thermal instability), poor feeding and a bulging soft spot (fontanel) on top of the head.  Such signs will suggest that tests of the infant’s central spinal fluid (CSF) be made.   Some 25%-40% of the cases will be positive for HSV cultures.  Other signs indicated by CSF tests include an abnormally high number of cells in the CSF (pleocytosis) as well as high concentrations of protein (proteinosis).
The disorder is usually evident between five and nine days after birth.
Mucocutaneous and Ocular Herpes (about 40% of cases)
Patients with this form of the disorder present with the disease localized to the skin, mouth, and/or eyes.  Laboratory tests, including liver and chest X-rays, are normal with no evidence of internal organ (visceral) involvement or neurological deficits.  Cultures for the presence of the HSV will be positive, as will tests for the HSV antigen.
The disorder usually becomes obvious between 15 and 17 days after birth.  However, presentation may be delayed for as long as 30 days.

