Hinman Syndrome

synonyms:
Hinman-Allen syndromenon-neurogenic neurogenic bladderoccult neuropathic bladderdysfunctional voiding

overview:
Summary
Hinman Syndrome (HS) is a rare pediatric disorder characterized by bladder dysfunction that mimics neurogenic disease without evidence of neurologic damage. Normally, nerves carry messages between the brain, spinal cord and bladder to tell the bladder to either relax or contract.  In neurogenic bladder, however, this system does not work correctly, and the patient loses control of their bladder. Similarly, in HS, there is discoordination between the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and parasympathetic nervous system (PNS), which can be thought of as the Yin-Yang control system of the bladder and bowel. The SNS and PNS play many roles in the body, including control of the bladder sphincter, which is a muscle that regulates the outflow of urine from the bladder. The SNS helps the sphincter contract to hold urine in, while the PNS relaxes the sphincter to allow the flow of urine out. In HS, the sphincter mistakenly closes when the bladder contracts, which increases bladder pressure. The continued discoordination between these two nervous systems over time causes children to develop disordered voiding (urination), which is commonly associated with behavioral and psychological conditions. This pattern can cause physical changes such as bladder wall thickening, outpouchings of the bladder wall (trabeculations) and back-up of urine into the kidneys (hydronephrosis). This dysfunctional voiding and incomplete bladder emptying can cause complications such as recurrent urinary tract infections (UTI), lack of control over urination (incontinence) and other symptoms of urinary tract deterioration. Hinman syndrome is thought to have a strong psychosocial component, and the worsening of the disease promotes further psychological and behavioral issues, which creates a vicious cycle .
Introduction
Hinman syndrome was first described by Dr. Frank Hinman and Dr. Franz Baumann in 1972. Initially, children were thought to have neurogenic bladder, but after normal spinal cord and central nervous system scans, the condition was deemed “nonneurogenic” due to symptoms that resemble neurogenic bladder, but without evidence of a neurogenic cause. The name was later changed to “Hinman syndrome” when these two physicians described the symptoms and physical exam findings of this disorder.

symptoms:
A common presentation of HS is urinary incontinence without symptoms of urgency or the sudden, uncontrollable need to urinate. This is similar to symptoms in patients with neurogenic bladder. Parents may notice their child not urinating as frequently or urinating too much. When asked, parents may report that the patient does not urinate; however, when they are requested or reminded to urinate, the child may empty their bladder. The patient will often report that they cannot feel the sensation of their bladder being full. Other signs include starting and stopping of the urine stream (intermittent stream), squeezing abdominal muscles to urinate and increased urine left in the bladder (residual volume) despite voiding multiple times. These can lead to increased pressure in the bladder due to increased urine volume and bladder muscle contraction. Recurrent UTIs, involuntary defecation (encopresis) and constipation can also be seen in patients with HS.

