Hirschsprung Disease

synonyms:
colonic aganglionosiscongenital megacolonHAECHirschsprung-associated enterocolitisHirschsprung’s diseaseHSCRintestinal aganglionosismegacolon, aganglionic

overview:
Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is a birth defect. This disorder is characterized by the absence of particular nerve cells (ganglions) in a segment of the bowel in an infant. The absence of ganglion cells causes the muscles in the bowels to lose their ability to move stool through the intestine (peristalsis). Peristalsis is a normal process of the body. Peristalsis creates wave-like contractions from the muscles lining the intestines. These contractions propel stool and other waste material through the digestive system. Ineffective peristalsis leads to stool backing up in the intestines. Affected individuals can develop constipation and partial or total obstruction of the bowels. Pain and discomfort can result. If not treated, a potentially serious bacterial infection may develop. The specific symptoms can vary from one person to another. HSCR can occur as an isolated problem or as part of a broader disorder that affects multiple organ systems.

symptoms:
Symptoms in the newborn period include failure to pass the meconium within a short time after birth. Meconium is the dark sticky substance that is normally present in the intestine at birth and is passed as an infant’s first bowel movement after birth. Failure to pass a first stool for 24-48 hours is suggestive of HSCR.
Infants with HSCR will very often have abdominal swelling (distention), abdominal pain, and vomiting. Affected infants have constipation and often exhibit poor weight gain, and slow growth.
HSCR can sometimes lead to a condition called enterocolitis, which is inflammation of the small intestines and colon. This is often referred to as Hirschsprung-associated enterocolitis. Hirschsprung-associated enterocolitis is the most frequent complication of HSCR occurring in 30-40% of individuals with HSCR and can be mild to severe in nature.  Hirschsprung-associated enterocolitis often presents with fever, explosive diarrhea, abdominal swelling, lethargy, and vomiting. Some individuals with either severe or untreated Hirschsprung-associated enterocolitis may develop sepsis, which is a widespread bacterial infection of the bloodstream and is potentially life-threatening. Severe or untreated enterocolitis can also lead to toxic megacolon, another life-threatening complication. It cannot be overemphasized that an individual with HSCR who develops these symptoms should urgently seek medical attention.
Approximately 90% of initial HSCR diagnoses in the United States are made within the first year of life. Most of the remaining 10% are made in early childhood, with less than 1% being made in teenage years or adulthood. Not surprisingly, these individuals often report a lifelong history of constipation.

