HNRNPU-Related Disorder

synonyms:
developmental and epileptic encephalopathy 54

overview:
HNRNPU-related disorder is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder (RNDD) characterized by seizures, early onset epilepsy, low muscle tone (hypotonia), autistic features and intellectual disability. This condition is caused by changes (variants or mutations) in theHNRNPUgene.

symptoms:
HNRNPU-related disorder is characterized by global developmental delay and intellectual disability, typically in the range of moderate to severe, with speech and language delay and/or absent speech. Affected individuals may also display autistic features. There may be feeding difficulties during the neonatal period as well as neonatal hypotonia which will likely remain lifelong. Abnormal physical features have been described but they are non-specific. Affected individuals are likely to experience seizures which are usually tonic-clonic or absence seizures and may be refractory to treatment. Patients are likely to have abnormalities on a brain MRI. Heart abnormalities are less common but may also be present.
Global Developmental Delay	100%Abnormal Facial Features	97%Seizures	95%Intellectual Disability	84%Hypotonia	79%Neonatal Feeding Difficulties	57%Vision Impairment	36%Autistic Traits	33%Rapid Breathing and Apnea	Rare
Developmental delay and intellectual disabilityAll patients described in the literature, with sufficient clinical information to ascertain the level of delay in various developmental areas, had developmental delay and intellectual disability. Developmental delay and intellectual disability ranged from mild to very severe. Most individuals also have a speech and language delay.
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and other behavioral concernsAn autism diagnosis or autistic behaviours were described in 33% of individuals in the literature. Autistic traits included obsessions, inflexibility and incapacity for change, stereotypies such as hand-flapping and rocking and difficulties with sensory processing. Other behavioral difficulties described included self-stimulatory behaviors and aggression towards caregivers, emotional dysregulation with outbursts of laughter, screaming, aggression or teeth grinding (bruxism).
SeizuresSeizures or epilepsy have been described in 95% of individuals and remains a hallmark ofHNRNPU-related disorder. A variety of seizure types have been reported in the literature, including generalized (tonic-clonic and absence) and focal and complex focal seizures. Affected individuals are likely to experience seizures that start before 24 months of age and the most common type of seizures are tonic-clonic or absence. Seizures may be refractory to treatment but evidence in the literature suggests that most seizures associated withHNRNPU-related disorder respond to standard antiepileptic medications including sodium valproate and levetiracetam.
Feeding issuesFeeding difficulties were described in 57% of individuals in the literature. Some children had difficulty gaining weight (failure-to-thrive) in infancy. Feeding difficulties included poor neonatal suck or latch, vomiting, gastroesophageal reflux, food refusal behaviors and requirement for assistance-feeding. Some babies required naso-gastric tube insertion. Feeding difficulties in infancy have been reported to improve with time.
HypotoniaGeneralized muscle weakness (hypotonia) is seen in 79% of individuals reported with HNRNPU-related disorder with nearly half presenting with neonatal hypotonia. This often improves with age.
Facial & other featuresNon-specific abnormal facial features have been described in most affected children (97%). There are no specific or defining facial features, but typical features included palpebral fissure abnormalities, thin upper vermillion, frontal bossing, curved fifth finger and long columella. Some patients also had bunions and webbing of the second and third fingers.
Sleep disturbanceSleep disturbance is a common finding. This included reports of obstructive sleep apnea, poor sleep and easy waking. Other findings have included breath holding episodes and irregular breathing patterns, particularly at night, that coincide with sleep disturbances.
Structural brain abnormalitiesStructural brain abnormalities have been described, but MRI brain imaging has not been done routinely unless there is a clinical indication. This may mean an underreporting of structural brain abnormalities in the literature. There were 62 individuals reported in the literature who had brain MRI imaging and 38 (61%) had abnormalities noted. The most common abnormality was large ventricles (ventriculomegaly) followed by thinning of the corpus callosum.
GrowthProportionate short stature has been observed in about 50% of individuals for whom data has been reported but further studies are required to determine the cause of this. One individual had an abnormally small head (microcephaly).
HeartCommon heart abnormalities include atrial septal defect, ventricular septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus, and in a small number of patients, tricuspid atresia, tetralogy of Fallot, aortic dilatation and transposition of the great arteries.
EyesAbout 30% of affected individuals have crossed eyes (strabismus). Far-sightedness (hypermetropia) has been described in at least two individuals.

