Homocystinuria due to Cystathionine Beta-Synthase Deficiency

synonyms:
classic homocystinuriaclassical homocystinuriacystathionine beta-synthase deficiencyhomocystinuria

overview:
Cystathionine Beta-Synthase (CBS) deficiency, more commonly referred to as homocystinuria is a rare metabolic condition characterized by an excess of the compound homocysteine in the urine and blood. CBS deficiency is one of the conditions which often result from deficiency of any one of several enzymes involved in the conversion of the essential amino acid methionine to another amino acid (cysteine)–or, less commonly, impaired conversion of the compound homocysteine to methionine. Enzymes are proteins that accelerate the rate of chemical reactions in the body. Certain amino acids, which are the chemical building blocks of proteins, are essential for proper growth and development. In most cases, homocystinuria is caused by reduced activity of an enzyme known as cystathionine beta-synthase and this results in CBS deficiency. Infants who develop homocystinuria due to CBS deficiency (which is also known as classical homocystinuria) may fail to grow, or grow longer too fast, often have difficulty with gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive) and have developmental delays.
By approximately age three, additional, more specific symptoms and findings may become apparent. These may include partial dislocation (subluxation) of the lens of the eyes (ectopia lentis), associated “quivering” (iridodonesis) of the colored region of the eyes (iris), severe nearsightedness (myopia), and other eye (ocular) abnormalities. Although intelligence may be normal in some cases, many children may be affected by progressive intellectual disability. In addition, some may develop psychiatric disturbances and/or episodes of uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain (seizures). Affected individuals also tend to be thin with unusually tall stature for their family; long, slender fingers and toes (arachnodactyly); and elongated arms and legs (“marfanoid” features). In addition, affected individuals may be at risk for the development of blood clots that can become lodged within certain large and small blood vessels (thromboembolisms), potentially leading to life-threatening complications.
Homocystinuria due to deficiency of CBS deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. The disorder is caused by changes (mutations) of a gene that regulates the production of the CBS enzyme. The CBS enzyme requires the vitamin pyridoxine (also known as vitamin B6) and in some people this vitamin in their diet of supplements may delay diagnosis by making it harder to identify clinically and thus test for it.

symptoms:
The symptoms associated with homocystinuria due to CBS deficiency are highly variable. Some affected individuals may have only very mild signs of the disorder; others may have many different symptoms including some potentially life-threatening complications. Individuals can be separated into two distinct groups: those who respond to therapy with pyridoxine (vitamin B6) and those who do not. Generally, individuals who respond to pyridoxine therapy have a milder form of the disorder, most likely because of residual activity of the CBS enzyme, but this does not mean that they will not have life-threatening complications. In addition, the presence and specific location of blood clots also determines the severity of associated symptoms in each individual.
Infants with homocystinuria due to CBS deficiency are normal at birth, but, if left untreated, will slowly develop the various symptoms associated with the disorder. Prompt detection and treatment of homocystinuria due to CBS deficiency is important in preventing or reducing the symptoms associated with the disorder.
Homocystinuria due to CBS deficiency can potentially affect many different organ systems of the body. The four organ systems most commonly involved are the eyes, central nervous system, skeleton and the network of vessels that carry blood and other fluids throughout the body (vascular [circulatory] system).
In some cases, the abnormalities affecting the eyes may be the first noticed outward sign of homocystinuria due to CBS-deficiency. Many individuals develop displacement of the lenses of the eyes (ectopia lentis) away from the center of the eyeball. Affected individuals also usually develop severe nearsightedness (myopia) and quivering of the colored portion of the eye (iridodonesis). Ectopia lentis and myopia usually develop after the first year of life, often by 10 years of age.
Additional abnormalities of the eyes have been reported in individuals with homocystinuria due to CBS deficiency. These abnormalities occur less frequently than ectopia lentis and myopia. Such abnormalities include clouding of the lenses of the eyes (cataracts), degeneration of the nerve (optic nerve) that relays signals from the eye to the brain (optic atrophy), and glaucoma, a condition in which increased pressure within the eye causes characteristic damage to the optic nerve. Some individuals may have separation of the thin layer of nerve cells (retina) that lines the back of the eyes from its underlying support tissue (retinal detachment). The retina normally senses light and converts it into nerve signals, which are then relayed to the brain through the optic nerve. Retinal detachment may cause blurred vision or the appearance of “floaters” in the field of vision.
In some patients, delays in attaining developmental milestones (developmental delays) may be the first noticeable symptom in children with homocystinuria due to CBS deficiency. Affected children may be slow in sitting, standing, walking and speaking or other milestones. Some children have normal intelligence; others develop varying degrees of intellectual disability. Treatment early (in the first few months and at least by 3 years) can help preserve intellect. Approximately 20 percent of children with homocystinuria due to CBS deficiency develop seizures. Some affected children also exhibit psychiatric issues including depression, anxiety, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and other behavioral or personality disorders.  These complications may be more common in adults with homocystinuria.
Individuals with homocystinuria due to CBS deficiency also develop a variety of skeletal abnormalities. Skeletal abnormalities are usually not present at birth and may not become detectable until later during childhood. Common findings include thinning and lengthening of the long bones (dolichostenomelia), knees that are bent inward so that they touch when the legs are straight (“knock knees” or genu valgum), a highly arched foot (pes cavus), abnormal sideways curvature of the spine (scoliosis), or an abnormally protruding chest (pectus carinatum) or an abnormally sunken chest (pectus excavatum). Many individuals with homocystinuria due to CBS deficiency are at a greater risk than the general population of developing osteoporosis. Osteoporosis is condition characterized by a general loss of bone density that can lead to an increased risk of fractures.
A serious complication associated with homocystinuria due to CBS deficiency is an increased risk of developing clots (thrombi) in blood vessels that can break off and become lodged in another vessel (thromboembolism). Blood clots can occur at any age. Specific symptoms associated with a thromboembolic event depend on the exact site of the clot and the specific blood vessels and organs that are affected. Thromboemboli can cause serious, life-threatening complications including strokes and blood clots in the lungs (pulmonary embolisms).
Although less common, several additional findings have been reported in individuals with homocystinuria due to CBS deficiency including extremely fine, fragile skin, discoloration of the skin (hypopigmentation), rashes on the cheeks (malar flushing) and abnormally thin skin. Some individuals may develop fatty changes in the liver, protrusion of part of the intestines through a tear in the abdominal wall (inguinal hernia) or inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis), a small organ located behind the stomach that secretes enzymes that travel to the intestines and aid in digestion. Abnormal front-to-back curvature of the spine (kyphosis) and a collapsed lung (spontaneous pneumothorax) have also been reported in individuals with homocystinuria due to CBS deficiency.

