HTLV Type I and Type II

synonyms:
acute T-cell leukemiaacute T-cell lymphomaATLHAM/TSPHTLV-I associated myelopathytropical spastic paraparesis

overview:
HTLV-I was first isolated in 1980 from a patient originally thought to have a cutaneous lymphoma. It became clear that it was a distinct form of lymphoma, which was designated as acute T-cell leukemia/ lymphoma (ATL). Some years later, different groups in Martinique and Japan described an association between a chronic disease of the spinal cord and HTLV-I infection, which was later named HTLV-I associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP). Since then, several other conditions have been linked to HTLV infection.
It is estimated that between 10 and 20 million people are infected by HTLV-I in the world. Only 0.25-2% of the infected individuals will develop a progressive neurologic disease named HTLV-I associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP). Approximately 2-5% of HTLV-I carriers will develop ATL. More rarely, HTLV-I may lead to arthropathy, uveitis (inflammation of the eye), pneumonitis and thyroid problems. Areas of the world that are endemic to the HTLV-1 virus are the Caribbean, southern Japan, equatorial Africa, Middle East, South America, and Melanesia.

symptoms:
HAM/TSP usually has an insidious onset and chronic evolution. Initial symptoms are subtle and include gait problems, unexplained falls, low back pain, constipation, urinary urgency/incontinence and numbness or pain in the lower limbs. Over the years, progressive leg weakness ensues followed by the exacerbation of the urinary and sensory symptoms. The prognosis of the neurological disability is variable. While some patients are still ambulatory after one or two decades of disease, others may be confined to a wheelchair months after onset of disease.
HTLV-I-induced ATL has four different subtypes: acute, lymphomatous, chronic and smoldering. Each of them has a distinct clinical picture and evolution. A combination of skin and bone lesions, pulmonary infiltrates, elevation of serum calcium, enlargement of the liver, spleen and lymph nodes, and opportunistic infections may be present.

