Human Monocytic Ehrlichiosis (HME)

synonyms:
Human Ehrlichial Infection, Human Monocytic Type

overview:
Human Monocytic Ehrlichiosis (HME) is a rare infectious disease belonging to a group of diseases known as the Human Ehrlichioses. These diseases are caused by bacteria belonging to the “Ehrlichia” family. Several forms of Human Ehrlichioses have been identified, including Human Monocytic Ehrlichiosis, Sennetsu Fever, and Human Granulocytic Ehrlichiosis. Though caused by different strains of Ehrlichia bacteria, the disorders are characterized by similar symptoms.
The symptoms of Human Monocytic Ehrlichiosis may include a sudden high fever, headache, muscle aches (myalgia), chills, and a general feeling of weakness and fatigue (malaise) within a few weeks after initial infection. In addition, in many cases, laboratory findings may indicate an abnormally low number of circulating blood platelets (thrombocytopenia), a decrease in white blood cells (leukopenia), and an abnormal increase in the level of certain liver enzymes (hepatic transaminases). In some individuals, symptoms may progress to include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, weight loss, and/or confusion. If HME is left untreated, life-threatening symptoms, such as kidney failure and respiratory insufficiency, may develop in some cases. Human Monocytic Ehrlichiosis is caused by the bacteria Ehrlichia chaffeensis (or E. chaffeensis). E. chaffeensis is carried and transmitted by certain ticks (vectors), such as the Lone Star tick (Amblyomma americanum) and the American dog tick (Dermacentor variabilis).

symptoms:
Human Monocytic Ehrlichiosis (HME) was the first form of Human Ehrlichial infection recognized in the United States. The onset of symptoms usually occurs about three weeks after an individual has been bitten by a tick carrying the bacterium Ehrlichia chaffeensis. Symptoms may initially include fever, chills, headaches, muscle pain (myalgia), and a general feeling of weakness and fatigue (malaise). In some cases, a rash may appear on the skin. Symptoms may then progress to include nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite (anorexia), and/or weight loss. Some affected individuals may also experience coughing, diarrhea, sore throat (pharyngitis), and pain in the abdominal area.
In most cases of HME, there is also an abnormal decrease in white blood cells (leukopenia), a low number of circulating blood platelets (thrombocytopenia), and/or an abnormal increase in the level of certain liver enzymes (hepatic transaminases). Some affected individuals may also experience inflammation of the liver (hepatitis).
In some severe cases of Human Monocytic Ehrlichiosis, if appropriate treatment is not received, symptoms may include shortness of breath (dyspnea); abnormalities in the blood’s ability to clot properly (coagulopathy), potentially resulting in gastrointestinal bleeding; and/or neurologic abnormalities due to involvement of the brain and the spinal cord (central nervous system [CNS]).  Affected individuals with CNS involvement may develop abnormal tissue changes (lesions) in the brain, experience inflammation of the protective membranes covering the brain and spinal cord (meningitis), and/or have abnormalities in the fluid surrounding the brain and spinal cord (cerebrospinal fluid).  Neurologic symptoms and findings may include confusion, abnormal sensitivity to light (photophobia), stiffness of the neck, episodes of uncontrolled electrical disturbances in the brain (seizures), and/or coma.  Additional neurologic abnormalities may include exaggerated reflex responses (hyperreflexia), impaired coordination of voluntary movements (ataxia), and/or loss of some motor function in the facial area due to impairment of one or more of the 12 nerve pairs arising from the brain (cranial nerve palsy).  In severe cases, if HME is left untreated, life-threatening complications may result, such as kidney (renal) and/or respiratory failure.
Some affected individuals may have a milder form of Human Monocytic Ehrlichiosis, experiencing only some of the symptoms typically associated with the disorder. Such symptoms may include muscle aches (myalgia), joint pain (arthralgia), headache, and/or loss of appetite (anorexia). In addition, it is believed that some individuals affected with HME may demonstrate no obvious symptoms (asymptomatic).

