Human Granulocytic Ehrlichiosis (HGE)

synonyms:
HGEhuman ehrlichial infection, human granulocytic type

overview:
Human Granulocytic Ehrlichiosis (HGE) is a rare infectious disease that belongs to a group of diseases known as the Human Ehrlichioses. The Ehrlichioses are infectious diseases caused by bacteria in the “Ehrlichia” family. Several forms of Human Ehrlichial infection have been identified including Human Granulocytic Ehrlichiosis (HGE), Sennetsu Fever, and Human Monocytic Ehrlichiosis (HME). Though caused by different strains of Ehrlichia bacteria, the disorders are all characterized by similar symptoms.
The symptoms of Human Granulocytic Ehrlichiosis (HGE) may include a sudden high fever, headache, muscle aches (myalgia), chills, and a general feeling of weakness and fatigue (malaise) within a week or so after initial infection. In most cases, abnormal laboratory findings may occur including an abnormally low number of circulating blood platelets (thrombocytopenia), a decrease in white blood cells (leukopenia), and an abnormal increase in the level of certain liver enzymes (hepatic transaminases). In some cases, symptoms may progress to include nausea, vomiting, cough, diarrhea, loss of appetite (anorexia), and/or confusion. If Human Granulocytic Ehrlichiosis is left untreated, life-threatening symptoms, such as kidney failure and/or respiratory problems, may develop in some cases. Human Granulocytic Ehrlichiosis is caused by a bacterium of the Ehrlichiosis family that has not yet been named. The Ehrlichial bacterium is carried and transmitted by certain ticks (vectors), such as the deer tick (Ixodes scapularis) and the American dog tick (Dermacentor variabilis).

symptoms:
In individuals with Human Granulocytic Ehrlichiosis (HGE), the onset of symptoms usually occurs approximately one week after an individual has been bitten by a tick carrying the Ehrlichia bacterium. The particular strain of Ehrlichia bacterium responsible for HGE has not yet been named. In almost all cases, symptoms include fever, chills, muscle pain (myalgia), a general feeling of weakness and fatigue (malaise), and/or headaches. Some affected individuals may also experience coughing, nausea, vomiting, joint pain (arthralgia), and/or confusion. In extremely rare cases, a rash may appear on the skin.
In addition, most individuals with HGE exhibit an abnormal increase in the level of certain liver enzymes (hepatic transaminases); low levels of the protein albumin in the blood (hypoalbuminemia); and/or an abnormal decrease in circulating blood platelets (thrombocytopenia), red blood cells (anemia), and/or certain granular white blood cells (granulocytopenia) that play a role in removing bacteria from the blood and destroying them.
In some severe cases, if Human Granulocytic Ehrlichiosis is left untreated, life-threatening symptoms may develop, such as respiratory insufficiency, severe gastrointestinal bleeding, kidney (renal) failure, and/or liver damage.
According to the medical literature, in rare cases, individuals with HGE may be simultaneously infected with Lyme disease, a more common bacterial disease that is transmitted by deer ticks (which are also known tick vectors for HGE). In such cases, affected individuals may experience symptoms and physical findings often associated with both HGE and Lyme disease such as headache, fever, muscle aches, weakness, joint pain (arthralgia), and/or abnormalities of liver function. They may also experience certain symptoms and findings specific to one disorder yet rarely found in the other, such as the appearance of a characteristic red skin lesion (erythema chronicum migrans), which is often associated with Lyme disease, and/or a cough, thrombocytopenia, and/or granulocytopenia, which often occur in those with HGE. According to the medical literature, it is not yet clear whether coinfection with HGE and Lyme disease may result in more serious disease than that typically associated with infection with HGE or Lyme disease alone. (For more information on Lyme disease, please see the “Related Disorders” section of this report below.)

