Hydrocephalus

synonyms:
HydrocephalyWater on the Brain

overview:
Hydrocephalus is a condition in which abnormally widened (dilated) cerebral spaces in the brain (ventricles) inhibit the normal flow of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The cerebrospinal fluid accumulates in the skull and puts pressure on the brain tissue. An enlarged head in infants and increased cerebrospinal fluid pressure are frequent findings but are not necessary for the diagnosis of Hydrocephalus. There are several different forms of Hydrocephalus: communicating hydrocephalus, non-communicating hydrocephalus or obstructive hydrocephalus, internal hydrocephalus, normal pressure hydrocephalus, and benign hydrocephalus.

symptoms:
Hydrocephalus is characterized in children by an unusually large head (cephalomegaly); a thin, transparent scalp; a bulging forehead with prominent spaces between the bones of the skull (fontanelles); and a downward gaze.  Other symptoms may include convulsions, abnormal reflexes, a slowed heartbeat and respiratory rate, headache, vomiting, irritability, weakness, and problems with vision.  Blindness and continuing mental deterioration may occur if treatment is not administered.
When hydrocephalus begins in an adolescent or a young adult, the facial abnormalities are less obvious than in children with congenital or early onset hydrocephalus.  Many of the other mental and physiologic symptoms are the same; however, previously acquired skills requiring coordinated movement (motor coordination) may be lost.  Affected children and adolescents may also exhibit symptoms associated with diminished activity of the pituitary gland (hypopituitarism), such as delayed growth, obesity, and general weakness.
Hydrocephalus is subdivided according to the particular defect that exists in the brain and whether the cerebrospinal fluid pressure is high or normal.
In “communicating hydrocephalus”, there is no blockage (obstruction) in the cerebral spaces of the brain (ventricular system); the cerebrospinal fluid flows readily into the subarachnoid space (the space between the arachnoid and pia mater membranes in the brain), but the fluid is not absorbed readily, or perhaps produced in too great a quantity to be absorbed.
In “noncommunicating (obstructive) hydrocephalus”, the cerebrospinal fluid is blocked causing widening (dilation) of the pathways upstream of the block, leading to increased cerebrospinal fluid pressure in the skull.
“Normal-pressure hydrocephalus”, which affects middle-aged and older persons, is characterized by dilated ventricles but normal pressure within the spinal column (lumbar pressure).  Other symptoms of normal-pressure hydrocephalus include loss of memory and intellectual capacity (dementia), loss of muscle coordination (ataxia), and loss of bladder control (urinary incontinence).  Additional symptoms may include lack of emotions (apathy), memory disturbances, the slowing of mental and motor functions, and/or a lack of awareness or indifference to the affected sides of an affected individual’s body (anosognosia).

