Hyperekplexia

synonyms:
familial startle diseasehereditary hyperekplexiahyperexplexiastartle syndrome

overview:
Summary
Hyperekplexia is a rare hereditary, neurological disorder that may affect infants as newborns (neonatal) or prior to birth (in utero). It may also affect children and adults. Individuals with this disorder have an excessive startle reaction (eye blinking or body spasms) to sudden unexpected noise, movement, or touch. Symptoms include extreme muscle tension (stiffness or hypertonia) that prevent voluntary movement and can cause the affected person to fall stiffly, like a log, without loss of consciousness. Exaggeration of reflexes (hyperreflexia), and an unstable way of walking (gait) may also occur. Hyperekplexia is usually inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, but autosomal recessive or rarely, X-linked inheritance, has also been reported.
Introduction
Hyperekplexia is frequently misdiagnosed as a form of epilepsy so the process of getting an accurate diagnosis may be prolonged Treatment is relatively uncomplicated and involves the use of anti-anxiety and anti-spastic medicines Physical and cognitive therapy are supplemental treatment options.

symptoms:
There are major and minor forms of hyperekplexia. In the major form, hyperekplexia is characterized by an unusually extreme startle reaction to sudden unexpected noise, movement, or touch. Arching of the head (exaggerated head-retraction reflex or HRR), spastic jerking movements (myoclonic jerks) or falling stiffly to the ground (without losing consciousness) tend to occur when the individual is startled.  The frequency and severity of the startle response can be increased by emotional tension, stress, or fatigue.
Jerking movements can also occur when the patient is trying to fall asleep (hypnagogic myoclonic jerks; for more information on myoclonic jerks, choose “myoclonus” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database). Extreme muscle tension or stiffness (hypertonia) is common in infants with hyperexplexia, especially at birth. Affected babies may not move around much, and when they do, they tend to move slowly (hypokinesia).
Other symptoms presented by infants as well as adults may include exaggeration of reflexes (hyperreflexia), interrupted breathing (intermittent apnea) and/or unstable walking (gait), usually with a mild wide-based stance. Some patients have a dislocation of the hip that is present at birth. Hernias are not uncommon in the lower abdomen (inguinal hernias).
In the minor form, individuals with hyperekplexia usually experience only an inconstant exaggerated startle reaction with few or none of the other symptoms. In infants with the minor form, the reaction may be brought on by fever. In children and adults, intensity of the startle response may be affected by stress or anxiety.
Onset of both major and minor forms of hyperekplexia is usually from birth, but in some patients it does not occur until adolescence or adulthood.  Mild intellectual disability may also be observed.

