Hyper IgM Syndromes

synonyms:
HIGMIHISimmunodeficiency with hyper IgM syndrome

overview:
Summary

Hyper IgM syndromes are a group of rare disorders in which the immune system does not function properly. They are classified as rare primary immunodeficiency disorders, which are a group of disorders characterized by irregularities in the cell development and/or cell maturation process of the immune system. The immune system is divided into several components, the combined actions of which are responsible for defending the body against different infectious agents. The T cell system is responsible for fighting yeast and fungi, several viruses, and some bacteria. The B cell system fights infection caused by other viruses and bacteria. It does so by secreting immune factors called antibodies (also known as immunoglobulins) into the fluid portion of the blood (serum) and body secretions (e.g., saliva). There are five classes of immunoglobulins known as IgA, IgD, IgE, IgG, and IgM. Antibodies can directly kill microorganisms or coat them so they are more easily destroyed by white blood cells (leukocytes).
Hyper IgM syndromes are caused by very rare, one-in-a-million, and potentially life-threatening genetic mutations that severely compromise the immune system and resulting in the individual’s inability to produce antibodies. Patients with hyper IgM are at significant risk for opportunistic and repeated infections. In addition, the defect in the immune system results in a decreased ability to identify and fight cancer cells as well as an inability to produce a response to pathogens. Some individuals with hyper-IgM syndrome have abnormally high levels of immunoglobulin IgM in the fluid portion of the blood, which led to the term “hyper IgM” syndrome. However, researchers have determined that many affected individuals have normal levels of IgM. Affected individuals may have normal to high IgM, but cannot produce adequate levels of immunoglobulins IgG, IgA, and IgE because they cannot switch from the production of IgM to these other immunoglobulin classes. Because these other immunoglobulins are deficient, affected individuals are susceptible to recurrent episodes of certain pus-producing (pyogenic) bacterial infections. The gastrointestinal system is often involved causing recurrent, prolonged (protracted) diarrhea.
Approximately 70% of people with hyper IgM syndrome inherit the disorder in an X-linked recessive pattern. This is called X-linked hyper IgM syndrome or XHIM and is the most common type. Because it is X-linked, the disorder predominately affects males. Less often, affected individuals inherit the disorder in an autosomal recessive pattern. There are at least four types of autosomal recessive hyper IgM syndrome; these forms affect men and women equally. They are known as hyper IgM syndromes type 2, 3, 4, and 5.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of hyper IgM syndromes can vary from one person to another. This is true even among members of the same family. Affected individuals are more susceptible to developing various infections and cannot fight off infections well once they occur. Without treatment, these disorders can become life-threatening during childhood or adolescence. The initial symptoms of hyper IgM syndrome usually develop in the first or second year of life.
X-LINKED HYPER IGM SYNDROMEAffected individuals are susceptible to recurrent episodes of certain pus-producing (pyogenic) bacterial infections that may affect the upper and lower respiratory tract including the sinuses (sinusitis) and/or the lungs (pneumonitis or pneumonia); the middle ear (otitis media); the external ear canal (otitis externa); the membrane that lines the eyelids and the white portions (sclera) of the eyes (conjunctivitis); the skin (pyoderma); and/or other areas. These infections usually begin during infancy, often in the first year or two of life.
Affected individuals may also be unusually susceptible to “opportunistic” infections. The term “opportunistic” infection refers either to infections caused by microorganisms that usually do not cause disease in individuals with fully functioning immune systems or to widespread (systemic) overwhelming disease by microorganisms that typically cause only localized, mild infections.Pneumocystis carinii, a microorganism to which individuals with X-linked hyper IgM syndrome are particularly susceptible, causes a form of pneumonia characterized by fever, cough, abnormally rapid breathing (tachypnea), and/or a bluish discoloration (cyanosis) of the skin and mucous membranes. Affected individuals may also be susceptible toHistoplasma capsulatum, a fungus whose spores, when inhaled, may produce histoplasmosis, an infection characterized by fever; cough; a general feeling of ill health (malaise); and/or irregularities of the lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy). Chronic inflammation and swelling of the sinuses (sinusitis) and thickening, widening, and scarring of the small airway tubes of the lungs due to chronic inflammation and infection (bronchiectasis) are common.
In addition, parasiticCryptosporidiumis sometimes found in the intestinal tract of affected individuals, causing persistent diarrhea. Cryptosporidium may also be associated with degenerative disease of the liver (cirrhosis) and inflammation, thickening and scarring of the bile ducts (sclerosing cholangitis). The bile ducts are the passages that carry bile from the liver. These conditions can be associated with abdominal pain, fever, chills, and/or persistent yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes, and whites of the eyes (jaundice). Some individuals may experience liver disease because of infection with cytomegalovirus.
Other findings associated with X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome, some of which may become apparent at as early as six to nine months of age, may include chronic diarrhea that, in some people, may lead to impaired absorption of nutrients by the intestinal tract (malabsorption). Affected infants with intestinal malabsorption may fail to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Infants and children may also develop widespread warty growths (verruca vulgaris) on the skin and/or skin rashes consisting of discolored spots (macules) and small elevated areas (papules) on the face, the scalp, and the bending surfaces of certain joints.
Individuals with X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome may also be prone to developing autoimmune disorders, especially those affecting certain elements of the blood. The term “autoimmune” refers to conditions in which the body’s natural defenses against invading microorganisms mistakenly attack healthy tissue. Affected individuals may experience recurrent (cyclic) or persistent (chronic), often severe neutropenia, a condition in which there is an abnormal decrease in the number of certain white blood cells (neutrophils). Neutrophils play a major role in detecting, destroying, and removing invading bacteria from the blood (phagocytosis). An abnormal decrease in neutrophils (neutropenia) is often associated with fever, inflammation of the gums (gingivitis), and/or inflammation and/or ulceration of the mucous membranes of the mouth (stomatitis). In some people, neutropenia may also result in weight loss and/or susceptibility to other infections. Other autoimmune disorders that can develop include hemolytic anemia, a condition resulting from autoimmune destruction of red blood cells, and/or thrombocytopenic purpura, a condition characterized by abnormally low levels of circulating blood platelets. Platelets are specialized blood cells that help prevent and stop bleeding. Decreased levels of circulating blood platelets (thrombocytopenia) may result in increased susceptibility to bruising, the appearance of small purplish spots (petechiae) on the skin, and/or abnormal bleeding into various tissues of the body.
Other autoimmune complications that can develop in people with X-liked hyper IgM syndrome include arthritis, impairment function of the thyroid (hypothyroidism), inflammatory bowel disease, and kidney disease.
In approximately 10-15% of affected individuals, neurological symptoms can develop because of infection of the central nervous system.
In addition, affected individuals may be more prone to developing certain forms of cancer than the general population. Cancers associated with this disorder have included leukemias (a cancer of the blood), those occurring in the gastrointestinal tract (colon and liver), including cancer of the bile ducts (cholangiocarcinoma) and the most common type of liver cancer (hepatocarcinoma); and neuroectodermal tumors of the gastrointestinal tract and the pancreas.
HYPER IGM SYNDROME TYPE 2This form of hyper IgM syndrome is also known as activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) deficiency. The signs and symptoms are similar to those seen in individuals with X-linked hyper IgM syndrome. Affected individuals often develop bacterial infections, especially those of the sinuses and lungs (sinopulmonary infections). These infections usually begin very early in life. Chronic inflammation and swelling of the sinuses (sinusitis) and thickening, widening, and scarring of the small airway tubes of the lungs due to chronic inflammation and infection (bronchiectasis) are common. Gastrointestinal infections often due toGiardia lambliaor viruses are also common. Abnormal enlargement of the spleen (splenomegaly) and the lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy) because of an increase in the number of white blood cells within lymph nodes (lymphoid hyperplasia) are also common. The tonsils may become abnormally large and require surgical removal. Autoimmune conditions, such as autoimmune cytopenia as described, are more common in hyper IgM syndrome type 2 than the X-linked form. Low levels of red cells (anemia) and platelets (thrombocytopenia) are most common. Other autoimmune conditions can develop including inflammation of the liver (hepatitis), and in rare cases, inflammatory bowel syndrome and arthritis. Unlike X-linked hyper IgM syndrome, individuals with hyper IgM syndrome type 2 usually do not develop opportunistic infections. Generally, IgM levels in the blood are much higher than in the X-linked form. Some affected individuals have a mild disease that can go undiagnosed into the teen-aged years or 20s.
HYPER IGM SYNDROME TYPE 3This form of hyper IgM syndrome is also known as hyper IgM syndrome due to CD40 deficiency. This form of the disorder causes signs and symptoms that are virtually indistinguishable from X-linked hyper IgM syndrome described above.
HYPER IGM SYNDROME TYPE 4Affected individuals have developed infections of the sinuses and lungs (sinopulmonary infections), widespread infection of the blood (sepsis), inflammation and infection of the lymph nodes (lymphadenitis), and infection and inflammation of bone (osteomyelitis). Osteomyelitis can cause fever, chills, sweating, bone pain, and swelling and limited movement of nearby joints. Generally, individuals develop similar, but generally milder symptoms than individuals with hyper IgM syndrome type 2. Most affected individuals do not develop opportunistic infections.
HYPER IGM SYNDROME TYPE 5This form is also known as uracil-DNA-glycosylase deficiency. Affected individuals develop signs and symptoms that are similar to those seen in hyper IgM syndrome type 2 including a susceptibility to bacterial infections and lymphoid hyperplasia, and a lack of opportunistic infections.

