Hyperlipoproteinemia Type III

synonyms:
broad beta diseasedysbetalipoproteinemiafamilial dysbetalipoproteinemiaremnant removal disease

overview:
Hyperlipoproteinemia type III is a genetic disorder that causes the body to breakdown (metabolize) fats (lipids) incorrectly. This results in the buildup of lipids in the body (hyperlipidemia) and can lead to the development of multiple small, yellow skin growths (xanthomas). Affected individuals may also develop the buildup of fatty materials in the blood vessels (atherosclerosis) blocking blood flow and potentially leading to heart attack or stroke. Hyperlipoproteinemia type III affects 1-5,000 to 1 in 10,000 people in the general population. Without treatment, affected individuals are 5-10 times more likely to develop cardiovascular disease.

symptoms:
The symptoms of hyperlipoproteinemia type III may vary from person to person. Some individuals may not show any symptoms (asymptomatic). Symptoms of hyperlipoproteinemia type III often do not appear unless additional conditions are present such as diabetes, obesity, or hypothyroidism.
The most common feature associated with hyperlipoproteinemia type III is the development of xanthomas, which are deposits of fatty materials (lipids) in the skin and appear as multiple yellow bumps (papules) on or just beneath the skin. Xanthomas may form on different parts of the body including the hands, elbows, knees, knuckles, arms, legs, and buttocks. Xanthomas on the palms of the hands, a condition called xanthoma striata palmaris, is specific to hyperlipoproteinemia type III and has not been reported in any other disorder. Xanthomas can also develop within the tendons of the rear lower legs (Achilles tendon) and occasionally on the fingers. Some affected individuals may have fatty deposits within the corneas of the eyes (arcus lidus corneae).
The risk for developing coronary heart disease is 5-10 times higher for an individual with hyperlipoproteinemia type III compared to the general population. Individuals with hyperlipoproteinemia type III may develop thickening and blockage of various blood vessels (atherosclerosis) due to the buildup of fatty material (lipids). Atherosclerosis may result in coronary heart disease or peripheral vascular disease. Coronary heart disease results from blockage of the blood supply to the heart potentially resulting in chest pain (angina) and heart attack. Peripheral vascular disease is a general term for disease of the blood vessels outside of the heart and brain. It results from blockage of the blood flow to various organs and the extremities. Decreased blood flow to the legs may result in cramping and cause a limp (claudication). Some individuals may have an abnormally enlarged liver or spleen (hepatosplenomegaly).
Individuals with hyperlipoproteinemia type III may eventually develop inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis). Chronic pancreatitis may result in back pain, diarrhea, yellow-colored skin (jaundice), and potentially the development of diabetes. Pancreatitis can also lead to the development of pancreatic cancer.

