Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis

synonyms:
extrinsic allergic alveolitis

overview:
Summary
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) is a form of lung disease resulting from inhalation to a large variety of organic and, less often, nonorganic antigens. These antigens, frequently found in certain occupational settings, cause a reaction from the immune system (allergic reaction) that causes inﬂammation in the lungs.
The inﬂammatory reaction associated with HP occurs in the alveoli, the air sacs inside the lungs that are responsible for breathing and gas exchange. This is different from allergic asthma, as HP occurs in the alveoli, while asthma occurs in the airways or bronchi of the lungs. HP is a complex respiratory syndrome with varying intensity and clinical presentation. HP can occur for a short duration with respiratory symptoms and fever lasting from hours to several weeks after a subsequent exposure. The chronic form arises from long-term exposure to the inciting antigen and may last from weeks to years. Chronic HP can ultimately lead to permanent lung scarring (pulmonary ﬁbrosis) and inadequate oxygen intake (respiratory insufﬁciency).

symptoms:
The clinical presentation of a patient with HP varies substantially depending on the type, duration and intensity of the inciting antigen exposure and whether they have lung fibrosis. Symptoms of early non-fibrotic HP may arise several hours after the exposure and consist of a flu-like syndrome with malaise, fever and chills. Respiratory symptoms include non-productive cough and difficulty breathing. Symptoms usually resolve within 24-48 hours but may recur upon re-exposure to the antigen. The presentation of fibrotic HP has a more gradual onset with dry cough, exertional breathlessness and fatigue as the most common symptoms.
Symptoms may be episodic or situational in relation to inciting antigen exposure. Patients without lung fibrosis may have a normal physical examination or show inspiratory expiratory wheeze. Patients with fibrotic HP typically have inspiratory Velcro-like crackles on lung auscultation. In advanced cases of lung ﬁbrosis, heart failure and abnormally rounded ﬁngertips (digital clubbing) may occur.

