Hyperferritinemia Cataract Syndrome

synonyms:
hereditary hyperferritinemia cataract syndromeHHCS

overview:
Hyperferritinemia-cataract syndrome is an extremely rare genetic disorder characterized by the early onset of cataracts associated with persistently elevated levels of ferritin in the blood plasma. Ferritin is a protein that binds to iron and is used as an indicator of the body’s iron stores. Cataracts are the only known complication associated with this disorder. Hyperferritinemia-cataract syndrome is caused by mutations toferritin light chain(FTL) gene. This mutation is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait.

symptoms:
The only known symptom of hyperferritinemia-cataract syndrome is the early onset of cataracts, usually between the second and fourth decades of life. However, onset of the disorder has been reported in children as young as five and adults more than 40. The overall prognosis of the disorder is very good. The severity of the hyperferritinemia-cataract syndrome can vary greatly from one person to another even among members of the same family. Some individuals with characteristic mutations of the FLT gene have not developed any symptoms (asymptomatic).
Cataracts are characterized by a clouding (opacity) of the lenses of the eye and can affect vision. The lens of an eye is the clear front portion of the eye through which light passes. The light is focused on the retina, the thin nerve-rich membrane lining the back of the eye. The retina converts light into nerve impulses and relays the information along the optic nerve to the brain. Cataracts can potentially affect both eyes and may cause several symptoms. Evidence suggests that cataracts in hyperferritinemia-cataract syndrome may become progressively worse.
Individuals with hyperferritinemia-cataract syndrome may experience glare symptoms that are worse when driving at night or in bright sunlight. Glare symptoms means that headlights, lamps, and other lights may appear too bright or have a halo form around them. Some affected individuals may be abnormally sensitive to light (photophobia) or experience blurred or hazy vision.

