Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome

synonyms:
Aortic and Mitral Atresia with Hypoplasic Left Heart SyndromeHLHS

overview:
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome is a term used to describe a group of closely related rare heart defects that are present at birth (congenital). The normal heart has four chambers. The two upper chambers, known as atria, are separated from each other by a fibrous partition known as the atrial septum. The two lower chambers are known as ventricles and are separated from each other by the ventricular septum. Valves connect the atria (left and right) to their respective ventricles. The valves allow for blood to be pumped through the chambers. Blood travels from the right ventricle through the pulmonary artery to the lungs where it receives oxygen. The blood returns to the heart through pulmonary veins and enters the left ventricle. The left ventricle sends the now oxygen-filled blood into the main artery of the body (aorta). The aorta sends the blood throughout the body.
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome is characterized by the underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the chambers on the left side of the heart (i.e., left atrium and ventricle). In addition, the mitral valve, which connects these chambers to each other, is usually abnormally narrow (stenosis) or closed (atresia) and the aortic valve, which connects the heart to the major vessels that lead from the lungs (ascending aorta), may also be narrow or closed. Infants with hypoplastic left heart syndrome also have an abnormally narrow ascending aorta.

symptoms:
The symptoms of hypoplastic left heart syndrome are directly related to the underdevelopment of the left side of the heart and associated structures.  In all cases, infants have impaired blood flow from the lungs, through the heart, and on to other parts of the body (systemic circulation).  Symptoms may include difficulty breathing (dyspnea), a high-pitched noise while inhaling (rales), and grayish-blue discoloration of the skin (cyanosis) during the first 48 hours of life, which occurs because of low levels of circulating oxygen in the blood.  Impaired blood flow characteristic of hypoplastic left heart syndrome results in fluid buildup in the heart, lung and various body tissues (congestive heart failure).
Infants with hypoplastic left heart syndrome may accumulate excessive acids in their blood and other body tissues (metabolic acidosis).  Symptoms may include poor feeding habits, frequent vomiting, lethargy, and/or shock.  When shock occurs, the symptoms may include abnormally high pulse (tachycardia) and respiration rate, respiratory distress, abnormally enlarged liver (hepatomegaly), cool moist skin, abnormally low blood pressure, and/or paleness. In most cases, if left untreated, life-threatening complications usually occur.
The progression and severity of hypoplastic left heart syndrome depend upon a structure called the ductus arteriosus, which is present in all newborns. The ductus arteriosus is a passageway that allows blood to travel from the right ventricle to the aorta and then throughout the body, bypassing the left side of the heart and the lungs. However, the ductus arteriosus closes shortly after birth forcing blood to travel through the malformed left ventricle resulting in impaired blood flow throughout the body.

