Hypochondroplasia

synonyms:
HCH

overview:
Hypochrondroplasia is a genetic disorder characterized by small stature and disproportionately short arms, legs, hands, and feet (short-limbed dwarfism). Short stature often is not recognized until early to mid childhood or, in some cases, as late as adulthood. In those with the disorder, bowing of the legs typically develops during early childhood but often improves spontaneously with age. Some affected individuals may also have an abnormally large head (macrocephaly), a relatively prominent forehead, and/or other physical abnormalities associated with the disorder. In addition, in about 10 percent of cases, mild mental retardation may be present.
In some cases, hypochondroplasia appears to occur randomly for unknown reasons (sporadically) with no apparent family history. In other instances, the disorder is familial with autosomal dominant inheritance.

symptoms:
Hypochondroplasia is primarily characterized by small stature, disproportionately short arms and legs (limbs), mild to moderate shortness of the fingers and toes (brachydactyly), and broad, short hands and feet (i.e., short-limbed dwarfism).  Slow growth often is not apparent at birth; as noted above, it may not be recognized until about two to three years of age, later during childhood, or as late as adulthood.
In those with hypochondroplasia, shortening of the limbs may be relatively mild or moderate.  During early childhood, outward bowing of the legs (i.e., bowlegs [genu varum]) typically appears that is pronounced during weight bearing.  This condition often improves spontaneously later during childhood.  Many affected individuals also have limited extension and rotation of the elbows.  In addition, beginning in childhood, exercise may result in minor aching or discomfort of the elbows, knees, and/or ankles.  In affected adults, such joint pain may extend to involve the lower back.  Approximately one third may also have abnormally pronounced inward curvature of the spine of the lower back (lordosis).
Some individuals with hypochondroplasia also have an abnormally large head (macrocephaly).  In addition, the skull may be relatively broad and short (brachycephaly) or rectangular in shape with a slightly prominent forehead.  However, the facial appearance is typically normal.  Reports indicate that mild mental retardation may also be present in approximately 10 percent of affected individuals.

