Hypothalamic Obesity, Acquired

overview:
Summary
“Hypothalamic obesity” refers to excess weight gain that may follow from an injury to the hypothalamus, a brain region with many important functions. The hypothalamus affects energy intake, by regulating how much we eat, and energy expenditure, by regulating how much energy our bodies use. Damage to the hypothalamus disrupts the carefully coordinated balance between energy intake and expenditure, often leading to increased calorie intake and/or decreased calorie burning, and thereby to rapid weight gain. This weight gain can be difficult to reverse with currently available treatments. The term “hypothalamic obesity” in clinical practice, and for the purposes of this report, is often used to refer specifically to obesity caused by anatomical injury to the hypothalamus. In contrast to these acquired forms of hypothalamic obesity, there are many genetic disorders that affect the function of the hypothalamus and include a tendency to excess weight gain, for example, Prader-Willi syndrome. Also, some individuals born with malformations of the brain may also experience hypothalamic dysfunction and excess weight gain. These genetic or inborn conditions highlight the importance of the hypothalamus for metabolism. For purposes of this report, however, the focus is on acquired hypothalamic obesity. Frequently, acquired hypothalamic obesity is a complication of the surgical removal of a hypothalamic brain tumor, or a complication of the tumor itself. Tumors that arise from the pituitary gland or invade the hypothalamus such as craniopharyngiomas, germinomas, gliomas, hamartomas and pituitary adenomas.1Other causes of acquired hypothalamic obesity include traumatic brain injury, infectious or inflammatory injury, radiation or hemorrhage (bleeding in the brain).
The hypothalamus regulates the balance between eating calories and burning off calories; damage to this area affects different people in different ways. Some individuals are excessively hungry (hyperphagia) and/or are not easily satisfied by food. Others gain weight rapidly even when restricting calories due to a low resting metabolic rate which results in the individual burning fewer calories (energy) at rest, and individuals also tend to have lower levels of physical activity and exercise. The etiology, magnitude and severity of abnormalities in hypothalamic regulation of energy balance distinguish hypothalamic obesity from “common” forms of obesity.
The hypothalamus influences other body functions besides energy balance, and as a result, individuals with hypothalamic obesity can also have other related health problems. One very frequently encountered health problem is hypopituitarism. The pituitary gland is often called the “master gland” because it governs the production of endocrine hormones throughout the body. The pituitary gland, in turn, receives signals from the hypothalamus. Individuals with damage to the hypothalamus and/or pituitary often require medications to treat endocrine hormone deficiencies. Without proper supplementation, some of these hormone deficiencies, such as growth hormone deficiency or hypothyroidism, can also contribute to the development of obesity. Other health issues include fluid and electrolyte balance problems, difficulties with heart rate and blood pressure regulation, sleep problems, day-night (circadian) problems and difficulties with body temperature regulation. Tumors in this area can also damage the optic nerves and chiasm, leading to visual impairment, including blindness. Hypothalamic injury, along with the condition that produced the injury, can have complex psychosocial effects as well, on both the affected individual and their family.
Currently, there are no FDA approved treatments specifically for hypothalamic obesity, highlighting a substantial unmet need. There are strategies that may have some benefit, though responses are not uniform in all affected individuals. Indeed, there is substantial variation between individuals with hypothalamic obesity, thus the most appropriate management approach will be personalized and delivered by an experienced, multi-disciplinary team. Nutrition, physical activity, behavior, medication and in some cases, surgery, can all play a role. Identifying and treating related disorders is critical. It is also vital to ensure there are mental and behavioral health supports in place to help individuals with hypothalamic obesity thrive while also managing their medical conditions.
History
Some of the earliest insights about the many roles of the hypothalamus in health and disease come from historical descriptions of individuals with hypothalamic brain tumors.2 Individuals with hypothalamic tumors often came to medical attention for the combination of obesity and hormone deficiencies. Notably, both Dr. Joseph Babinski (in 1900)3and Dr. Alfred Froehlich (in 1901)4described individuals with tumors in the hypothalamic/pituitary region who developed obesity and did not experience typical pubertal development. Critically, Dr. Paul Ehrlich (in 1904) argued that it was damage to the hypothalamus, and not the pituitary, that lead to the symptoms of the tumor. Subsequent studies by Dr. Harvey Cushing and others in experimental animal models showed that hypothalamic injury was the true cause of the weight gain and hormone problems.2
Historically, acquired hypothalamic obesity has been referred to as Froehlich syndrome or adiposogenital dystrophy, but these terms are no longer in widespread clinical use.

symptoms:
The key clinical feature of acquired hypothalamic obesity is excess weight gain following injury to the hypothalamus. The patient’s clinical presentation depends on the cause of the injury. For individuals with hypothalamic obesity related to brain tumors, a minority are obese at the time they are diagnosed with the brain tumor, suggesting that the brain tumor has already caused damage leading to weight gain that is unfortunately likely to be persistent.5More often, weight gain occurs after the tumor is removed surgically, suggesting a side effect of traditional surgical approaches is hypothalamic obesity and excess weight gain.6Newer, less invasive surgical techniques, including endoscopic endonasal techniques (approaching the tumor through the nose) may be less likely to cause hypothalamic damage that leads to obesity.7,8For individuals with hypothalamic damage from other causes, for example, traumatic brain injury or inflammation, the weight gain tends to begin at the time of the injury or very shortly after the acute problem has been treated.
The most common concern expressed by individuals with hypothalamic obesity is how resistant the weight gain is to conventional approaches to weight management, such as healthy nutrition, caloric restriction, and exercise. Another frequent observation is that individuals with hypothalamic obesity use less energy, both at rest9,10and/or with physical activity and exercise.11Because their bodies use less energy, individuals find that they can continue to gain weight even when caloric intake is restricted. Some, but not all, individuals also experience a severe disorder of appetite regulation, called hyperphagia, or excess appetite, and rarely feel satisfied after meals.12These abnormal eating behaviors are often distressing to individuals and families, and further contribute to weight gain. The hypothalamus also regulates other body functions that, when disrupted, cause symptoms. For example, individuals can have difficulty initiating and sustaining sleep. They can have excess daytime sleepiness, related to sleep impairment and also to problems maintaining circadian (day-night) alignment. Some individuals experience difficulties maintaining body temperature within typical range. Some also have challenges with regulating heart rate and blood pressure in response to the body’s needs. Individuals with hypothalamic hamartomas can have a particular kind of seizure called gelastic seizures. Tumors located in this area can also lead to damage of the optic nerves and chiasm, leading to visual impairment, including blindness. While hypothalamic and pituitary damage often leads to delayed puberty and hypogonadism, sometimes hypothalamic injury causes early puberty development, which first manifests as breast development in girls and testicular enlargement in boys. Often, individuals are affected by pituitary hormone deficiencies, most notably diabetes insipidus, or vasopressin deficiency, which affects fluid balance. (See “Related Disorders” and “Clinical Testing and Work-up” sections below for additional details regarding hypopituitarism.)

