Hypoparathyroidism

overview:
Hypoparathyroidism is a rare condition in which the parathyroid glands fail to produce sufficient amounts of parathyroid hormone or the parathyroid hormone produced lacks biologic activity. The parathyroid glands are part of the endocrine system, the network of glands that secrete hormones into the bloodstream where they travel to various areas of the body. These hormones regulate the chemical processes (metabolism) that influence the function of various organs and activities within the body. Hormones are involved in numerous vital processes including regulating heart rate, body temperature and blood pressure as well as cell differentiation and growth and also in modulation of several metabolic processes. Parathyroid hormone (along with vitamin D and the hormone calcitonin, which is produced by the thyroid gland) plays a role in regulating the levels of calcium and phosphorus in the blood and in determining bone growth and bone cell activity. Due to a deficiency of parathyroid hormone, individuals may exhibit abnormally low levels of calcium in the blood (hypocalcemia) and high levels of phosphorus (hyperphosphatemia). Hypocalcemia can cause a variety of symptoms including weakness, muscle cramps, excessive nervousness, headaches, and/or uncontrollable twitching and cramping spasms of certain muscles such as those of the hands, feet, arms, legs, and/or face (tetany). Numbness and tingling around the mouth and in the fingers and toes can also occur. The most common cause of hypoparathyroidism is damage to or removal of the parathyroid glands due to surgery for another condition. Hypoparathyroidism can also be caused by an autoimmune process or can occur for unknown reasons (idiopathic) or in association with a number of different underlying disorders. In rare cases, hypoparathyroidism may occur as a genetic disorder. Such cases can include familial hypoparathyroidism, which may be inherited as an autosomal recessive, autosomal dominant or X-linked recessive trait. NORD has a separate report on familial isolated hypoparathyroidism.

symptoms:
The symptoms of hypoparathyroidism occur due to low levels of calcium in the blood. The severity of the condition can range from mild symptoms such as a tingling or numbness in the fingers, toes or around the lips (paresthesias) to severe muscle cramps and muscle spasms. The muscle symptoms are often called tetany, a condition characterized by uncontrollable twitching and cramping spasms of certain muscles such as those of the hands, feet, legs, and arms. In rare cases, seizures or fits can occur, or the level of consciousness can be depressed.
Additional symptoms that may be associated with hypoparathyroidism include fatigue, generalized weakness, muscle aches, anxiety or nervousness, and headaches. Affected individuals may also have dry, coarse skin, brittle nails, and patchy hair loss such as the thinning of the eyebrows. Some individuals with hypoparathyroidism, especially those with chronic hypoparathyroidism since childhood, may have abnormalities affecting the teeth including the underdevelopment of the hard outer layer of the teeth (enamel hypoplasia), malformation of the roots and an increased risk of cavities (dental caries).
Hoarseness or voice changes, wheezing and difficulty breathing (dyspnea) can also be associated with chronic hypoparathyroidism. Sudden, muscular spasms affecting the larynx (laryngospasm) and the bronchial tubes (bronchospasm) may also occur. Laryngospasm causes closure of the upper end of the trachea and prevents air from reaching the lungs. Bronchospasm can restrict the flow of air into and out of the lungs. These are serious issues and are rare.
Depression, irritability, confusion, disorientation, mood swings and loss of memory have also been reported in individuals with hypoparathyroidism. In children, chronic hypoparathyroidism can result in stunted growth and slow mental development if it is not treated.
Less often, more serious complications can occur in individuals with hypoparathyroidism especially when hypoparathyroidism goes untreated or persists. Such symptoms include clouding of the lens of the eyes (cataracts), seizures or convulsions, fainting, abnormal heartbeats (cardiac arrhythmias) and, potentially, signs of congestive heart failure. Some individuals may develop calcium deposits (calcifications) in the brain or the kidneys. If enough calcifications occur in the kidneys, kidney function can become impaired. Individuals with hypoparathyroidism may be prone to developing kidney stones. Increased pressure of cerebrospinal fluid in the skull (intracranial hypertension) can also occur and may cause severe headaches and vision changes.

