Hypohidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia

synonyms:
Anhidrotic Ectodermal DysplasiaChrist-Siemens-Touraine SyndromeCST SyndromeEDAHED

overview:
Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is a rare inherited multisystem disorder that belongs to the group of diseases known as ectodermal dysplasias. Ectodermal dysplasias typically affect the hair, teeth, nails, sweat glands, and/or skin. HED is primarily characterized by partial or complete absence of certain sweat glands (eccrine glands), causing lack of or diminished sweating (anhidrosis or hypohidrosis), heat intolerance, and fever; abnormally sparse hair (hypotrichosis), and absence (hypodontia) and/or malformation of certain teeth. Many individuals with HED also have characteristic facial abnormalities including a prominent forehead, a sunken nasal bridge (so-called “saddle nose”), unusually thick lips, and/or a large chin. The skin on most of the body may be abnormally thin, dry, and soft with an abnormal lack of pigmentation (hypopigmentation). However, the skin around the eyes (periorbital) may be darkly pigmented (hyperpigmentation) and finely wrinkled, appearing prematurely aged. In many cases, affected infants and children may also exhibit underdevelopment (hypoplasia) or absence (aplasia) of mucous glands within the respiratory and gastrointestinal (GI) tracts and, in some cases, decreased function of certain components of the immune system (e.g., depressed lymphocyte function, and rarely cellular immune hypofunction), potentially causing an increased susceptibility to certain infections and/or allergic conditions. Many affected infants and children experience recurrent attacks of wheezing and breathlessness (asthma), respiratory infections; chronic inflammation of the nasal passages (atrophic rhinitis), scaling, itchy (pruritic) skin rashes (eczema), and/or other findings.
HED is usually inherited as an X-linked recessive genetic trait and is caused by a mutation in the ectodysplasin-A (EDA) gene; in such cases, the disorder is fully expressed in males only. However, females who carry a single copy of the disease gene (heterozygote carriers) may exhibit some of the symptoms and findings associated with the disorder. These may include absence and/or malformation of certain teeth, sparse hair, and/or reduced sweating. HED can also be inherited as an autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive genetic trait, caused by mutations in the EDAR or EDARADD genes. In such cases, the disorder is fully expressed in both males and females.

symptoms:
HED is characterized by lack of or diminished sweating (anhidrosis or hypohidrosis), abnormally sparse hair (hypotrichosis), and/or absence (hypodontia) and/or malformation of certain teeth. In addition, affected individuals often have characteristic facial abnormalities, irregularities of the skin, abnormalities of the mucous membranes lining the respiratory and gastrointestinal (GI) tracts, an increased tendency to develop certain infections and allergic conditions, and/or other abnormalities. The range and severity of the symptoms and findings associated with HED varies from case to case.
A primary feature of HED is a lack of or diminished sweating (anhidrosis or hypohidrosis), resulting from underdevelopment of or partial or complete absence of certain sweat glands (eccrine glands). Because affected infants and children are unable to sweat appropriately when exposed to warm environments, they can experience repeated episodes of heat intolerance and “unexplained” high fevers that may remain unexplained until the disorder is diagnosed. In individuals with HED, exertion can result in elevated body temperature (hyperpyrexia). Eating hot foods may also cause extreme discomfort. In some cases, without appropriate treatment, episodes of hyperpyrexia may result in life-threatening complications; particularly during the first two years of life.
Abnormal sparseness of hair (hypotrichosis) is also a primary characteristic of HED, and is due to incomplete formation and reduced numbers of hair follicles. Scalp hair is usually blond or lightly pigmented; abnormally sparse, short, and fine; and, in some cases, stiff, dry, and unruly. Abnormal bald patches on the scalp (alopecia) may also be present. In addition, the eyebrows and eyelashes are often scanty or absent, although, in some cases, the eyelashes may appear normal. After puberty, male patterns of hair growth (e.g., moustache and beard) can be normal, while in other cases, facial and pubic hair growth may be sparse. In affected males and females, pubic and underarm (axillary) hair is typically scant. In some cases, hair may be absent from the arms, legs, and/or trunk.
The third primary characteristic typically associated with HED is the absence (hypodontia) and/or malformation of teeth. In most cases, the majority of the primary (deciduous) and secondary (permanent) teeth are absent. The teeth most often present include front teeth (central incisors), teeth normally located next to the incisors (canines), and/or, in some cases, one or more molars. In most cases, the teeth that are present are widely spaced, with front teeth being pointed or cone shaped. In some rare cases, individuals with HED may lack all upper and/or lower teeth (edentulous or anodontia).  Some individuals can be missing all the teeth in one jaw and have some in the other jaw.
As a result of missing teeth the bony ridge of the jaws (alveolar process) that holds the teeth in place often fails to form properly. In addition, due to hypodontia, the lips may protrude outward (everted) and appear abnormally thick, the gums may be abnormally small or degenerated (atrophic), and the normally exposed red portion of the upper and lower lips (vermilion border) may not be noticeable.
Many individuals with HED have additional, characteristic facial features, including a prominent forehead (frontal bossing); underdeveloped nostrils (hypoplastic alae nasi) and a low or sunken nasal bridge (so-called “saddle nose”); and underdeveloped, sunken cheeks (malar hypoplasia).
Distinctive skin changes may also be present. Many affected newborns have unusual scaling or peeling of the skin, while many children develop itchy (pruritic), scaling skin rashes (eczema). In the majority of individuals with HED, the skin on most of the body is unusually thin and soft and can lack normal pigmentation (hypopigmentation). However, the skin around the eyes (periorbital) may be darkly pigmented (hyperpigmentation) and finely wrinkled, appearing prematurely aged. The skin may be extremely dry due to underdevelopment (hypoplasia) or absence (aplasia) of oil-secreting glands (sebaceous glands). Additionally there may be abnormalities in the skin ridge patterns (dermatoglyphic patterns) on the fingers, toes, palms of the hands, and/or soles of the feet. Some individuals with the disorder have unusually thin and brittle nails.
In many individuals with HED, mucous glands within the membrane lining the respiratory and gastrointestinal (GI) tracts (e.g., in the lung, pharynx, larynx, trachea, upper esophagus, stomach, intestines) are underdeveloped (hypoplastic) or absent (aplastic). There are several rare HED forms or subtypes that have abnormally decreased function of certain components of the immune system (e.g., depressed lymphocyte function, cellular immune hypofunction). The immune system works to protect the body against invading microorganisms, toxins, and other substances that are recognized as foreign to the body. In many infants and children with HED, such mucous gland abnormalities and/or immune system irregularities cause an increased susceptibility to certain infections and/or allergic conditions.
Salivary glands can also be underdeveloped (hypoplastic), leading to abnormal dryness of the mouth and an altered sense of taste or smell. In addition, some individuals with HED are unable to produce tears due to underdevelopment of the glands that secrete tears (hypoplastic lacrimal glands), hypoplasia of the ducts through which the tears pass (lacrimal ducts), and/or abnormal narrowing of the small openings in the inner corners of the eyelids where tears normally drain (stenotic lacrimal puncta). Eye (ocular) abnormalities may be present, including loss of transparency of the lens of the eyes (cataracts) and/or clouding of the portion of the eyes through which light passes (corneal opacities).
Females who carry a single copy of the mutated EDA gene for X-linked HED (heterozygote carriers) may have no symptoms or physical abnormalities or may have some of the characteristics associated with the disease. Approximately 70% of female carriers show symptoms that are typically milder than those associated with the fully expressed disorder. Female carriers of X-linked HED may have dental abnormalities such as absence of certain teeth (hypodontia) and/or abnormally small, pointed, conical teeth; sparse hair (hypotrichosis); reduced sweating; and/or irregular dermatoglyphic patterns. In some cases, abnormalities of the breasts and nipples have been reported, and approximately 80 percent of carriers may experience difficulties nursing.

