Hypothalamic Hamartoma

synonyms:
HHhypothalamic hamartoblastomahypothalamic hamartoma syndrome

overview:
Hypothalamic hamartomas (HH) are rare, tumor-like malformations that occur during fetal development and are present at birth. They are non-progressive lesions and do not expand, spread or metastasize to other locations. They grow in proportion to normal brain growth, and consequently their relative size to the rest of the brain is the same for the lifetime of the patient. There is tremendous diversity in the type and severity of symptoms from patient to patient. However, symptoms are apparent during childhood in the overwhelming majority of patients. Two clinical phenotypes of HH are recognized: 1) central precocious puberty and 2) epilepsy and related neurobehavioral symptoms.
For those with central precocious puberty only, symptoms may occur as early as 1-3 years of age. These patients present with precocious (abnormally early) development of the physical changes associated with puberty. Neurological problems, such as epilepsy, are usually absent. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging on patients with central precocious puberty typically shows attachment of the HH lesion in an anterior location in the hypothalamus, in the region of the tuber cinereum or pituitary stalk.
For those with epilepsy, gelastic (laughing) seizures are usually the first symptom, often during infancy. Associated symptoms can include developmental delay, cognitive deterioration, and psychiatric symptoms such as rage behaviors. MR imaging on patients with epilepsy typically shows attachment of the HH in a posterior location in the hypothalamus, in the region of the mammillary bodies. Approximately 40% of HH patients with epilepsy also have precocious puberty. These patients tend to have large lesions, which are broadly attached both anteriorly and posteriorly in the hypothalamus.
Anti-epilepsy medications usually do not control the gelastic seizures associated with HH, and seizures often worsen with additional seizures types that begin around 4-7 years of age. Cognitive deficits and psychiatric symptoms may also present at this time.
For some patients, HH can be a progressively disabling condition. For others, symptoms may be stable and represent little or no disability.
Patients with precocious puberty can usually be treated successfully with medications, specifically with a class of drugs known as gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists. Medications, specifically anti-epilepsy drugs (AEDs) are less successful for controlling the seizures associated with HH, and therefore surgical treatment is often required.  There has been rapid progress over the past 15 years on developing various surgical approaches for treating HH. The selection of the most appropriate surgical technique is individualized to the clinical symptoms and HH anatomy of each patient.

symptoms:
Central precocious puberty (CPP) is one of the hallmark clinical syndromes associated with HH. Puberty is abnormally early if it occurs prior to the age of 8 years in girls or 9 years in boys. “Central” indicates that the disease process responsible for triggering puberty at an abnormally early age involves the brain, with premature pulsatile release of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) which in turn signals the ovaries or testes to begin production of sex hormones (estrogen and progesterone in females and testosterone in males).
Central precocious puberty has many causes, and requires evaluation by a pediatric endocrinologist to identify and treat the underlying etiology. Hypothalamic hamartoma is one of the most important causes and is notable in that puberty associated with HH can occur at particularly early ages, even prior to 12 months of age in some patients.  The health consequences of abnormally early puberty include short stature and problems with age-appropriate psychosocial adjustment.
For girls, physical signs associated with CPP include breast development and the appearance of mature-appearing pubic and axillary hair. For untreated girls, menses (first menstrual bleeding) will follow. For boys, physical signs begin with testicular growth, followed by enlargement of the penis and maturation of the scrotum, with the development of pubic and axillary hair. Associated features include deepening of the voice and acne.
For patients with epilepsy and neurological symptoms, there is a great deal of variability with respect to the age of onset, severity and changes over time. This clinical diversity must be borne in mind when considering the diagnosis of HH, and are equally important when considering treatment options, including the timing of surgical intervention.
Gelastic seizures are the most characteristic symptom associated with HH. Superficially resembling laughter, they have a peculiar appearance that usually differs from true laughter, and most family members can readily distinguish between the two. Not uncommonly, patients may have seizures that more closely resemble crying rather than laughter (known dacrystic seizures). Gelastic seizures can be quite subtle, and may be mistaken for other conditions, particularly during infancy, including colic and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
They are brief, sometimes just a few seconds, and usually less than 30 seconds in duration. They can be very frequent, however, with multiple seizures per day, and even multiple seizures per hour in more severely affected patients. Gelastic seizures may or may not be associated with altered consciousness (altered awareness of the event). However, making this determination in infants and young children can be challenging.
Gelastic seizures associated with HH usually begin at an early age, and are usually the first seizure type. The correct diagnosis can be delayed by the unusual nature of this seizure. However, in retrospect, parents can identify the onset of these peculiar laughing spells at a very early age. In a series of patients with HH and epilepsy, the mean age of onset for gelastic seizures is 10.8 months, and 75% of all patients had onset before one year of age. Gelastic seizures become less frequent after 10 years of age, and may disappear entirely as other seizure types develop. Uncommonly, patients with HH may not develop gelastic seizures until adolescence or early adulthood.
Other seizure types that are more disabling to the patient develop in approximately 75% of children with HH and gelastic seizures, most commonly between 4-7 years of age. Virtually all possible types of seizures have been reported, and individual patients may have multiple active seizure types, including focal (localization-related) and generalized seizures.
Cognitive deficits are evident in the majority of patients with HH and epilepsy. Difficulties with processing speed and short-term memory are most common. Here again, there is significant diversity from patient to patient. Recent studies with neuropsychological testing in HH patients undergoing evaluation for surgical treatment show approximately 50% have intellectual disability (full-scale intelligence quotient [IQ] less than 70).  Factors contributing to a greater degree of cognitive impairment include 1) higher number of anti-epilepsy medications taken at the time of testing, 2) larger HH lesion size, 3) younger age of seizure onset, and 4) higher seizure frequency. Conversely, patients with HH and central precocious puberty without epilepsy typically do not have developmental or cognitive deficits.
Behavioral and psychiatric symptoms are also common in the group of patients with HH and epilepsy. Episodes of behavioral aggression associated with poor frustration tolerance, often described as rage attacks, are particularly problematic and are a hallmark symptom of HH. Rage attacks are usually reactive to external (often minor) stimuli, and consist of explosive anger. These behaviors can be the most disabling feature of the disease for some patients. There is a greater likelihood of rage behaviors with 1) male gender, 2) the presence of intellectual disability, 3) younger age at the time of first seizure, and 4) multiple seizure types (rather than only gelastic seizures).
Psychiatric symptoms are reported in over 80% of children and adults with HH and epilepsy. A wide range of symptom types, symptom severity and psychiatric diagnoses can be involved. In children with HH, these include oppositional-defiant disorder (83%), attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (75%), conduct disorder (33%) and mood disorder (17%), which are far more common in affected patients compared to their unaffected siblings.
Roughly half of children with HH and epilepsy experience deterioration (worsening) of their symptoms over time, with a decline in cognitive functioning and worsening of behavioral symptoms. Worsening seizures, cognitive decline, and behavioral deterioration often occur simultaneously, and probably share a biological link. HH appears to be a clinical model for epileptic encephalopathy, although the basic mechanisms responsible for the deterioration experienced by these patients are poorly understood.

