I Cell Disease

synonyms:
GNPTAInclusion Cell DiseaseLeroy DiseaseML Disorder, Type IIML IIMucolipidosis IIN-Acetylglucosamine-1-Phosphotransferase Deficiency

overview:
I-cell disease (mucolipidosis II) is a rare inherited metabolic disorder characterized by coarse facial features, skeletal abnormalities and mental retardation. The symptoms of I-cell disease are similar to but more severe than those of Hurler syndrome. The symptoms associated with this disorder typically become obvious during infancy and may include multiple abnormalities of the skull and face and growth delays.
This disorder belongs to a group of diseases known as lysosomal storage disorders. Lysosomes are particles bound in membranes within cells that break down certain fats and carbohydrates. Multiple enzyme deficiencies associated with I-cell disease lead to the accumulation of certain fatty substances (mucolipids) and certain complex carbohydrates (mucopolysaccharides) within the cells of many tissues of the body.
I-cell disease is caused by a mutation in the GNPTA gene that leads to a deficiency in the enzyme UDP-N-acetylglucoseamine-1-phosphotransferase. I-cell disease is inherited as an autosomal recessive genetic trait.

symptoms:
Some of the physical features associated with I-cell disease (ML II) may be apparent at birth (congenital), whereas other features may become apparent between the ages of 6 to 10 months. Craniofacial abnormalities may include coarse facial features, a depressed nasal bridge, a long and narrow head, an unusually high and narrow forehead, and/or skin folds on the inner corners of the eyes (epicanthal folds). The skin may appear to be unusually thick and tight in certain areas of the body (e.g., face, arms, and legs).  The corneas of the eyes may appear cloudy.
Infants with I-cell disease may also have skeletal malformations including abnormal curvature of the spine from side to side (scoliosis) and/or from front to back (kyphosis), an unusually short neck, dislocation of the hip at birth (congenital), swelling or enlargement of the top portion of the spine (lumbar gibbus), and/or limited mobility of the shoulders. Skeletal abnormalities may also include misaligned bones in the spinal column (vertebral breaking and wedging), wider than normal spaces between ribs, and/or unusual positioning of the fingers (metacarpal pointing). On occasion, infants with I-cell disease may have fingers that are fused together (split hand deformity or ectrodactyly). (For more information on this disorder, choose “split hand” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
Children with I-cell disease typically have severe delays in the development of gross and fine motor skills, hearing loss, lack of muscle tone (hypotonia), and varying degrees of mental retardation. Growth delays usually result in short stature (dwarfism). In some children with this disorder, a portion of the intestines may protrude through an abnormal opening in the abdominal wall in the area of the navel (umbilical hernia) and/or the groin (inguinal hernia). Abnormal enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly), is often observed in association with a protruding abdomen in infants with I-cell disease.
Other symptoms of I-cell disease may include frequent respiratory infections, constipation and/or diarrhea, overgrowth of gum tissue (gingival hyperplasia), and/or joint stiffness or joints that are “frozen” in place (contractures). Some children with I-cell disease may have abnormalities of the heart such as defects of the heart valves, enlargement of the heart (cardiomegaly), congestive heart failure and/or heart murmurs.
Individuals with I-cell disease often die in childhood, although some patients survive into their teens.

