Ichthyosis, CHILD Syndrome

synonyms:
CHILD NaevusCHILD NevusCongenital Hemidysplasia with Ichthyosis Erythroderma and Limb DefectsDisorders of Cornification 16DOC 16, Unilateral Hemidysplasia TypeUnilateral Hemidysplasia TypeUnilateral Ichthyosiform Erythroderma with Ipsilateral Malformations, Limb

overview:
CHILD syndrome (an acronym for congenital hemidysplasia with ichthyosiform erythroderma and limb defects) is an inherited disorder, affecting primarily women, that is characterized by ichthyosis-like skin abnormalities and limb defects on one side of the body. Other abnormalities may be present, as well.
If defects of other body organs are present, they are usually on the same side of the body as the skin and limb abnormalities.

symptoms:
CHILD syndrome is usually present at birth.  It may first become apparent at some point during the first month of life.
The skin is usually dry, itchy, red and scaly (ichthyosiform erythroderma) on one side of the body, although minor skin involvement in the shape of lines or segments may occur on the opposite side of the body.  Bands of normal skin may be found on the affected side as well. Patients with CHILD syndrome may be bald on one side of the head and have clawlike nails.
Limb defects usually occur on the same side of the body as the major skin symptoms.  These defects may range from underdevelopment of fingers and toes to complete absence of a limb.  Some of the types of skeletal defects that might occur include abnormal ribs, anomalies of the shoulder blades (scapula), webbing of the skin between joints, and absence of muscles of the breast (pectoral).
Heart defects sometimes associated with this syndrome include defects in the walls between auricles and/or ventricles, as well as complex heart disease in which less than adequate amounts of oxygen get to the organ (cyanosis).
Abnormalities of the central nervous system, blood vessels, kidneys, thyroid, lungs and adrenal glands, and of the reproductive and urinary system, may also occur.  Most of these abnormalities result from underdevelopment of the affected side of the body.

