Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension

synonyms:
benign intracranial hypertensionpseudotumor cerebri

overview:
Intracranial Hypertension (IH) is characterized by increased pressure inside the skull. Intracranial means inside the skull and hypertension means high fluid pressure. Intracranial hypertension means that the pressure of the fluid that surrounds the brain (cerebrospinal fluid or CSF) is too high. Elevated CSF pressure can cause two problems, severe headache and visual loss. If the elevated CSF pressure remains untreated, permanent visual loss or blindness may result. Pseudotumor cerebri and benign intracranial hypertension are both former names for IH, which are now considered inaccurate. These names do not adequately describe the disorder and downplay the seriousness of IH.
There are two categories of IH: primary intracranial hypertension and secondary intracranial hypertension. Primary intracranial hypertension, now known as idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH), occurs without known cause. This form is known to occur in young, overweight, females in their reproductive years (ages 20-45). However, IH can develop in both males and females of all ages and body types. Secondary intracranial hypertension has an identifiable, causative agent, including drugs (such as tetracycline, lithium, Vitamin A-derived oral acne medications or excessive ingestion of Vitamin A, and oral or intrathecal steroids, growth hormone treatments), sleep apnea and certain systemic diseases such as lupus, leukemia, kidney failure (uremia), meningitis and dural venous sinus thrombosis. There is an association of IH and Chiari type I malformation. Many other causes have been suggested in the medical literature but have not yet been confirmed as true causes. It is critical in these patients to rule out an intracranial space occupying mass by neuro-imaging (CT or MRI). Although many factors are known to trigger the disease, the mechanism by which IH occurs, in either primary or secondary forms, is not known. In many cases, either type of IH may be chronic.

symptoms:
The most common symptom is often an unbearably painful or frequent headache, sometimes associated with nausea and vomiting that is not relieved by medication. The headache often awakens the patient from sleep. Some patients are treated in the emergency room where a lumbar puncture (spinal tap) is done as a last resort, to temporarily ease the headache. Measurement of the opening pressure is encouraged during these procedures in order to assess for intracranial hypertension.
The diagnosis is also confirmed by detecting a high spinal CSF pressure reading, usually greater than 250 mmH2O or 25 cmH2O (200-250 mmH2O or 20-25 cmH2O is considered borderline high) and normal laboratory and imaging studies including CT scans and MRIs. There is generally a normal neurological examination as well, although abnormal findings may be detected on eye examination. The eye findings may be subtle, and not noted in an emergency room evaluation. It is not uncommon to misdiagnose a patient with IH as simply having a refractory migraine headache, and be treated as such. Unlike primary IH, secondary IH patients may have abnormal scans and laboratory tests.
The high CSF pressure may cause the optic nerves to swell (papilledema). The optic nerve connects the interior of each eye, the retina, to the vision centers of the brain. The optic nerve transmits impulses from the retina to these brain centers. The earliest sign of papilledema on a visual field test is known as an enlarged blind spot. Abnormal CSF pressure can also affect the eye muscles controlling eye movements producing double vision, but this is an infrequent event. (All patients with presumed IH should have a thorough eye examination including visual field tests by an ophthalmologist or neuro-ophthalmologist).
Other common symptoms include transient altered vision, particularly on movement or bending over, intracranial noise (pulse synchronous tinnitus), stiff neck, back and arm pain, pain behind the eye, exercise intolerance, and memory difficulties.

