Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis

synonyms:
cryptogenic fibrosing alveolitisidiopathic diffuse interstitial pulmonary fibrosisIPF

overview:
Summary
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a chronic lung disorder characterized by thickening, stiffening and scarring (fibrosis) of tissue within the lungs. Affected individuals develop shortness of breath and progressive lung disease. Ultimately, IPF results in life-threatening complications such as respiratory failure. The rate of progression can vary greatly from one person to another. Over years, most individuals experience increasing respiratory symptoms, progressive scarring of the lungs and a gradual decline in lung function. Less often, affected individuals have mild scarring within the lungs and little to no change in the disease for many years. In some cases, the disorder can progress rapidly (acutely), causing life-threatening complications within several years of diagnosis. The term ‘idiopathic’ means that the underlying cause of the disorder is unknown or unproven, however, recently genetic susceptibility has been shown to account for 35-40% of the risk of developing this disease. Although there is no cure for IPF, various different treatments are available to manage the disorder and several newer therapeutic options are being studied. Ultimately, some affected individuals will require a lung transplant.
Introduction
IPF is classified as a form of idiopathic interstitial pneumonia, which is a group of lung diseases that damage the lungs in a similar manner and occur due to unknown causes. This group of disorders is also known as diffuse parenchymal lung diseases. Collectively, these disorders are classified under the broader umbrella term, interstitial lung diseases (ILDs). ILDs a large group of disorders (more than 200) characterized by progressive scarring of the lungs. IPF is the most common form.

symptoms:
In the early stages of IPF no symptoms may be present (asymptomatic). As stated above, the progression of the disorder is highly variable. Some individuals may experience ‘exacerbations’ in which symptoms worsen for a period of time, before improving somewhat. The initial, characteristic symptom is shortness of breath that is particularly noticeable during exertion such as exercise. This is known as breathlessness or dyspnea. Affected individuals may also exhibit a mild, dry cough that produces little to no sputum (nonproductive cough). Sputum is material that is coughed up from the respiratory tract and can include saliva, mucus and phlegm. This persistent, nonproductive cough lasts for more than 30 days.
As the disease progresses, affected individuals develop breathlessness upon moderate exertion or exercise. They may exhibit fast, shallow breathing. The dry, hacking nonproductive cough may also occur. Eventually, breathlessness may develop upon minimal exertion or even at rest. Affected individuals may experience repeated bouts of coughing that cannot be controlled.
Additional symptoms that may occur include abnormal fatigue, discomfort in the chest, gradual, unintended weight loss, and aching joints and muscles. Some individuals develop clubbing of the fingers or toes. Clubbing is when the tissue at the bottom of the fingernails and toenails swells, becoming wider and rounder. Affected individuals have an increased risk of developing repeated chest infections (chronic pneumonia).
Ultimately, respiratory function in individuals with IPF declines to cause severe complications including respiratory failure. Pulmonary fibrosis can lead to other severe medical conditions including pneumonia (lung infection), collapsed lungs (pneumothorax), high blood pressure of the main artery of the lungs (pulmonary hypertension), blood clots in the lungs (pulmonary embolism), and heart failure. Individuals with IPF may be at an increased risk of developing lung cancer.
Some individuals experience an ‘acute exacerbation,’ which describes a rapid progression of the disease and a rapid deterioration of lung function. Acute exacerbations may be associated with a complicating factor such as an infection, pulmonary embolism, pneumothorax or heart failure. However, in many cases, acute exacerbations occur without any identifiable cause.

