Idiopathic Nodular Panniculitis

synonyms:
nodular nonsuppurative panniculitisPfeiffer-Weber-Christian syndromerelapsing febrile nodular nonsuppurative panniculitisWeber Christian Disease (so-called)

overview:
Summary
Idiopathic nodular panniculitis is a rare spectrum of skin disorders characterized by single or multiple, tender or painful bumps below the surface of the skin (subcutaneous nodules) that can be open sores (ulcerated) and usually lead to inflammation of the subcutaneous layer of fat (panniculitis). These nodules tend to be 1-2 centimeters in size and most often affect the legs and feet (lower extremities). Rare cases involve panniculitis of the breast. In most patients, idiopathic nodular panniculitis is associated with fever, a general feeling of ill health (malaise), muscle pain (myalgia) and/or abdominal pain. These symptoms may subside after a few days or weeks and may recur weeks, months or years later and on multiple occasions. The exact cause of idiopathic nodular panniculitis is not known (idiopathic).
Introduction
The term Weber-Christian disease has been used to describe a group of syndromes or diseases characterized by nodular panniculitis and additional symptoms involving various organ systems of the body (systemic). However, the association of nodular panniculitis and systemic findings may occur due to a variety of causes or secondary to several different diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematous, alpha-1-antitrypsin disease and connective tissue disease. The term Weber-Christian disease has led to confusion in the medical literature and many researchers suggest that its use be abandoned.

symptoms:
Idiopathic nodular panniculitis usually begins gradually. Abnormal bumps or masses (nodules) appear in the fatty layer under the skin (subcutaneous fat) of the legs, thighs and buttocks. In some patients, the arms, abdomen, and/or face may be involved. These nodules are usually 1-2 centimeters wide and may be either painful and tender or painless. In some patients, the affected area may become blue and red (erythema), ulcerated (open sore with yellow discharge) and waste away (atrophic), eventually healing and leaving a slight depression after a few weeks.
Another common finding associated with idiopathic nodular panniculitis is recurrent episodes of fever. Additional symptoms include a general feeling of ill health (malaise), fatigue, muscle pain (myalgia), joint pain (arthralgia) and/or abdominal pain. In some patients, weight loss may occur and nausea may be present. Rarely, inflammation of skin near the eye (orbital inflammation) may result in abnormal protrusion of the eye (proptosis).
In some patients, inflammation of the subcutaneous layer of fat (panniculitis) may affect additional organ systems of the body (systemic), potentially resulting in blood abnormalities such as low levels of circulating red blood cells (anemia), liver involvement such as an abnormally large liver (hepatomegaly), inflammation of blood vessels (vasculitis), sore muscles and joints (polyarthralgia and polymyalgia), piercing of the bowels (perforation) and lung involvement such as accumulation of fluid in the membrane surrounding the lungs (pleural effusion). These systemic events can be life threatening.

