Imagawa-Matsumoto Syndrome

synonyms:
IMMASSUZ12-related overgrowth disorderSUZ12-related overgrowthSUZ12-related neurodevelopmental disorder

overview:
SummaryImagawa-Matsumoto syndrome (IMMAS), also known as SUZ12-related overgrowth disorder, is a rare disease caused by changes (variants or mutations) in theSUZ12gene. It is often caused by newly arisen changes (de novomutations) but some patients inherit the changed gene from an affected or mildly affected parent (See Causes). Children with IMMAS often have delays in motor and developmental skills and may also have signs such as tall stature, intellectual and learning disabilities and some facial features that are different than expected based on their family background. Genital and urinary tract abnormalities may be other signs. There is no cure for IMMAS. Treatment is focused on the individual signs and symptoms in each patient and includes educational support and physical therapy.
IntroductionIMMAS was first identified in a female patient with a change in theSUZ12gene in 2017 by Dr. Eri Imagawa and Dr. Naomichi Matsumoto from Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine in Yokohama, Japan. More patients were identified and reported by Dr. Sharri Cyrus and Dr. William T. Gibson at the BC Children’s Hospital Research Institute in Vancouver, Canada. The disease continues to be studied by both groups to better understand how to help patients with IMMAS (See Clinical Trials and Studies).
IMMAS is sometimes known as a “Weaver-like” syndrome because patients may have symptoms like individuals with Weaver syndrome and other similar syndromes such as Cohen-Gibson syndrome (See Disorders with Similar Symptoms below). The reason for the clinical similarities between these disorders is that the SUZ12 protein (which is the product of theSUZ12gene) works together with the gene products affected in Weaver syndrome and Cohen-Gibson syndrome to form a protein partnership called the polycomb repressive complex 2 (“PRC2 complex”). Changes to the PRC2 complex can affect many of the regular processes that happen in the body, which is why patients with IMMAS can have a wide range of signs and symptoms. Management of these signs and symptoms is important for treating patients with IMMAS.

symptoms:
IMMAS is characterized by rapid growth in childhood and early bone maturation, leading to features such as increased height (tall stature), enlarged head circumference and hands and feet that are large for age. Children with IMMAS may have bent fingers or toes  (camptodactyly/clinodactyly) that do not completely straighten. It may also be difficult for affected individuals to extend their knees and elbows. Some patients have very flexible limbs (hypermobility of joints) and some may also develop a curved spine (scoliosis).
People with IMMAS typically have an increased head size (macrocephaly) broad or tall forehead and flattening of the back of the head (flattened occiput). Individuals who have a more triangular face with a small lower jaw (micrognathia) and a narrow head above the eyebrows (bitemporal narrowing) have also been reported. They may also have a generally round face and a more prominent chin. Some individuals may have a large space between the eyes (hypertelorism) and/or down-slanting outside corners of the eyes. A longer or more prominent space between the nose and upper lip (philtrum) may be present. Some people with IMMAS do not have all these facial differences.
Individuals with IMMAS may also have excessive loose skin and develop moles (pigmented nevi). In some individuals, increased hair growth (hypertrichosis) has been reported. Additional signs and symptoms of IMMAS include urinary and genital abnormalities.
Children with IMMAS frequently have developmental delays in acquiring motor and speech skills, and later in life may have learning and/or intellectual disabilities. They may also have autism spectrum disorder (ASD).

