Immune Thrombocytopenia

synonyms:
autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpuraITPidiopathic immune thrombocytopeniaprimary immune thrombocytopenia

overview:
Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) is an autoimmune bleeding disorder characterized by abnormally low levels of blood cells called platelets, a situation referred to as thrombocytopenia. Platelets are specialized blood cells that help maintain the integrity of the walls of blood vessels and help prevent and stop bleeding by accelerating clotting where it is needed. A normal platelet count ranges from approximately 150,000 to 400,000 per microliter (µL) of blood depending on the laboratory. However substantial bleeding does not usually occur until the platelet count is less than 50,000 or even 30,000/µl.
If someone has a platelet count lower than 100,000/µL of blood with no other reason for having low platelets, that person might have ITP. Platelet counts of 100-150,000/µL are frequent, have many possible causes and are usually less clinically important. There is currently no definitive laboratory test to diagnose ITP. Measurement of anti-platelet antibody levels is not considered to be diagnostic. Rather ITP is a “diagnosis of exclusion” meaning that other causes have been considered and are either eliminated or are unlikely. Tests to exclude other causes of thrombocytopenia depend on severity, symptoms, personal and family medical history and experience of the treating physician.
As the platelet count falls, the risk of developing bleeding symptoms increases, especially below 50,000/L (if platelet function is relatively normal). ITP can often be discovered incidentally in patients who are asymptomatic (meaning they do not have symptoms of ITP other than a low platelet count). Such incidental cases arise when a blood count is obtained for another reason, such as a routine yearly checkup or before a surgical procedure or during pregnancy. More often, patients with ITP develop symptoms unexpectedly, such as abnormal bleeding into the skin resulting in either bruising (purpura), or tiny red dots on the skin called petechiae. Bleeding from mucous membranes such as the nose and mouth, and less commonly the stomach, gastrointestinal and urinary tracts may also occur and may subsequently result in low levels of circulating red blood cells (anemia) especially in women who are having very heavy periods (menses). Fortunately, internal bleeding is uncommon. The most concerning, but rare, form of this is bleeding in the brain called an intracranial hemorrhage (ICH).
ITP is called “newly diagnosed” when it has been present for less than 3 months, “persistent” when present for 3-12 months, and “chronic” when present for longer than one year. The term “acute” is no longer used.
At least half of all adults with ITP disclose that they experience fatigue and an impaired quality of mental and emotional health, physical health, and social functioning. ITP can impact so many aspects of a patient’s and family’s life that school, work, relationships and sometimes daily living becomes challenging. Symptoms that often interfere with daily activities include anxiety, fear, depression, embarrassment because of unexplained bruising and other bleeding symptoms such as nose bleeds (epistaxis) or oral blood blisters, isolation, social inadequacy and frustration with a patient’s inability to control their body and their health. This list does not include the side effects of treatments which, while possibly improving platelet counts, can exacerbate some of these associated complications, such as the use of corticosteroids, a common first-line treatment. Together, the multi-faceted effects of ITP can take a significant toll on a patient’s and family’s quality of life.
Children have similar types of bleeding symptoms. At diagnosis their platelet counts may be lower than seen in adults, so they may have more skin or oral bleeding but are less likely than older adults to have serious, life-threatening bleeding. Since small children often feel normal when they present, their parents are usually more worried and feel worse than the children do. Adolescents behave more like adults. Children are less able to describe their symptoms but studies using an ITP survey called the Kid’s Tool Kit have demonstrated impaired quality of life. Small children may reflect irritability instead of fatigue.

symptoms:
A child or adult may display no symptoms (be asymptomatic) when a low platelet count is first discovered, or bleeding symptoms may appear first and then the platelet count is discovered to be low. Such symptoms may include:
•	Skin that bruises very easily and even spontaneously.•	A rash consisting of small red dots (petechiae) that represent small hemorrhages.•	Bleeding from the gums.•	Frequent nose bleeds that are long-lasting and hard to stop.•	Blood blisters on the inside of cheeks.•	Excessive and/or prolonged menstrual bleeding.•	Less commonly, signs of internal bleeding with blood in urine, vomit or bowel movements.•	In rare cases, serious bleeding into the brain (intracranial hemorrhage). This occurs in < 1% of children and increases in frequency in adults especially over the age of 60.
•	Bleeding can lead to anemia, which may itself cause fatigue. Impaired quality of life from fatigue, anxiety and side effects of treatment.

