Immunotactoid Glomerulopathy

synonyms:
glomerulonephritis with organized monoclonal microtubular immunoglobulin deposits (GIMMD)non-amyloid immunotactoid glomerulonephritisCongo red-negative amyloidosis-like glomerulopathy

overview:
Summary
Immunotactoid glomerulopathy is a rare kidney disease of the glomerulus, the site where blood and waste are filtered from the body. Microtubule proteins plug the glomerulus, causing damage. It can cause blood and protein in the urine (hematuria and proteinuria, respectively), which makes urine look red or foamy. Other symptoms include decreased kidney function (renal insufficiency), swelling in the legs or feet and high blood pressure (hypertension). It is diagnosed with a kidney biopsy. While the exact cause is unknown, it is most often found in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), B cell lymphomas and multiple myeloma. It has also been diagnosed in patients with a history of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. Treatment is typically aimed at the associated diseases since no treatments have been demonstrated to be effective for immunotactoid glomerulopathy yet. 40-50% of patients with immunotactoid glomerulopathy will progress to end stage renal disease within two to six years, depending on the severity. These patients will eventually need a kidney transplant and dialysis. The disease may return even after a kidney transplant, but it is usually less severe.
Introduction
Immunotactoid glomerulopathy and fibrillary glomerulonephritis, a similar but slightly more common condition, are two forms of non-amyloid fibrillary glomerular deposition diseases. Microtubules and antibodies (immunoglobulins) plug the glomerulus, the body’s filter in the kidneys. Under normal conditions, the glomerulus filters the blood to form urine and keeps the antibodies to help fight infections and microtubules to maintain cell structure. The word “immunotactoid” refers to these rod-like structures (“-tactoid”) produced by the immune system (“immuno”). “Glomerulopathy” refers to the abnormal buildup of these proteins, which causes swelling and eventually irreversible kidney damage. Scientists do not fully understand why these antibodies begin depositing in the glomerulus, but most that suspect certain underlying diseases play a role. Over time, the damaged filters spill proteins into the urine and eventually lose their ability to filter blood altogether.

symptoms:
The most common symptoms of immunotactoid glomerulopathy include:
Blood in the urine (hematuria)Protein in the urine (proteinuria) causing it to look “foamy”Loss of kidney function (renal insufficiency)High blood pressure (hypertension)

