Incontinentia Pigmenti

synonyms:
Bloch-Siemens incontinentia pigmenti melanoblastosis cutis linearisBloch-Sulzberger syndromeIPpigmented dermatosis, Siemens-Bloch type

overview:
Summary
Incontinentia pigmenti (IP) is a genetic ectodermal dysplasia affecting the skin, hair, teeth, microvasculature and central nervous system. Progressive skin changes occur in four stages, the first of which appear in early infancy or can be present at birth. IP is an X-linked dominant genetic disorder caused by changes (variants or mutations) in theIKBKGgene.

Introduction
IP was named based on the appearance of the skin under the microscope during the later stages of the condition.

symptoms:
SkinSkin changes are the most characteristic and common features in IP. They are described in four stages. In all the stages, the lesions appear in lines on the arms and legs or a swirled pattern on the trunk. They can be on the face and scalp. They do not always occur in order, may occur at the same time and the later stages may be permanent once they appear.
1) The first stage of IP may be present at birth or appear during early infancy. This phase consists of redness or inflammation of the skin (erythema), blisters and boils, most often affecting the extremities and the scalp. It can fade and come back again and again, commonly when there is an illness with fever. These recurrences may happen for years, even into adulthood.
2) The second stage may overlap the first and may be present at birth. During this phase, the blisters develop a raised, wart-like (verrucous) appearance, and the lesions look like warts. There can be thick crusts or scabs with healing and areas of darkened skin (increased pigmentation). The extremities are involved almost exclusively in this stage. These recurrences may happen for years.
3) The third stage may be present at birth in a small number of affected individuals, but usually appears between the ages of 6 and 12 months. In this phase, the skin is darkened (hyperpigmented). On the trunk, the dark skin occurs in a swirled pattern and is sometimes described as a “marble cake” appearance. Hyperpigmentation does not necessarily appear where the stage 1 and 2 rashes happen. The heavy pigmentation may fade over time, though it is permanent in many patients.
4) The “atrophic stage” is called the fourth stage, but there are suggestions that it may be present, but not obvious, at birth. These skin changes are pale or hypopigmented and hairless. There may be a diminished number of sweat glands.
TeethBetween 50 to 75 percent of individuals with IP have dental abnormalities. These abnormalities include a delay in the eruption of primary teeth; abnormal shape (contour) of teeth, giving them a peg-like or cone-shaped appearance; or the congenital absence of both primary and secondary teeth (anodontia); or small teeth (microdontia).
NailsSome individuals with IP have ridged, pitted, thickened (onychogryposis), or missing nails on the hands and/or feet. In some patients, painful growths may develop under the nail. These changes can be permanent.
HairApproximately 50 percent of individuals with IP have abnormal bald patches on the scalp (alopecia). This may happen where the stage one and two lesions have left scars or as part of a congenital skin dysplasia. The hair may be coarse, wiry, hard to comb, and/or lusterless.
EyesNearly one-third of individuals have eye (ocular) abnormalities. The most serious, but least frequent, is a congenitally small, abnormal eye. In any patient there can be an abnormality in the growth of blood vessels in the membrane lining the eyes (retina). If it is going to occur, it typically happens before the age of five. This problem may be treated if detected early. If left untreated, it may cause retinal detachment leading to permanent visual impairment or total blindness.
Nervous SystemMost individuals with IP will have no involvement of the nervous system and normal intellectual development. Severe neurologic complications can occur because of IP, the most serious of which is congenital or neonatal strokes. Some affected individuals may experience episodes of uncontrolled electrical disturbances in the brain (seizures). About 30 percent of children with IP will have slow motor development, muscle weakness in one or both sides of the body, intellectual disability and/or seizures.  Severe problems are unusual and may be most associated with early strokes.
OtherAbnormalities in the development of the breast, ranging from extra nipples to complete absence of the breast, are sometimes seen in individuals with IP.  Whether this is more common than in the general population has not been studied.
There are anecdotal reports of heat intolerance or lack of normal sweating in people with IP, but this has not been formally studied.

