Infantile Myofibromatosis

synonyms:
congenital generalized fibromatosisIMjuvenile myofibromatosis

overview:
Summary
Infantile myofibromatosis is a rare disorder characterized by the growth of one or more noncancerous (benign) tumors affecting the skin, bone, muscle, soft tissue and rarely the internal organs (viscera). The severity and specific symptoms, including the specific location and number of tumors can vary greatly from one person to another. These tumors do not spread (metastasize) but can grow large enough to cause symptoms by compressing or damaging nearby organs or other parts of the body. Most cases have onset in infants or young children, but adult-onset cases have also been described in the medical literature. Most cases of infantile myofibromatosis occur randomly, for no apparent reason. Rare familial cases (in which more than one family member is affected) have been identified and changes (variants) in two different genes (PDGFRBandNOTCH3) have been found to cause the condition in most of these patients. Treatment depends upon the location of the lesion(s). Spontaneous regression has been reported to occur in many cases; however, recurrence of the lesions has also been reported. Surgery is the main treatment option for focal tumors.PDGFRBvariant receptors due to gain of function alleles are often sensitive to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib.
Introduction
Infantile myofibromatosis was first described as a distinct entity in the medical literature in 1954 by Dr. A.P. Stout. The disorder was initially referred to as congenital generalized fibromatosis. Additional cases were reported in the medical literature under a variety of names including multiple congenital fibromatosis, multiple hamartomas, multiple vascular leiomyomatosis of the newborn and multiple congenital fibromatosis. In 1981, Drs. Chung and Enzinger provided a detailed review of the disorder and introduced the name infantile myofibromatosis.

symptoms:
More than 90% of cases of juvenile myofibromatosis have onset in infancy, although the disorder can first present later in childhood or less often in adults. The tumors can continue to develop throughout an individual’s life.
The specific symptoms of infantile myofibromatosis are broad and the severity can vary. Some infants have mild disease that resolves on its own without treatment (spontaneous regression). Other children develop extensive disease that involves internal organs and can cause life-threatening complications if left untreated. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all the symptoms discussed below and that every individual case is unique. Parents should talk to their child’s physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
The tumors or lesions that characterize infantile myofibromatosis are usually seen as firm, flesh or purple covered bumps (nodules) on the skin or just underneath the top layer of the skin (subcutaneous layer). These superficial lesions may be freely movable; deeper lesions are generally immobile. Skin lesions may be crusted or hardened (indurated). The lesions are usually not painful or tender. The overlying skin may be discolored red or purple and ulcerated. Lesions are also commonly found in muscle, soft tissue and bone and very rarely the internal organs.
Although the tumors that characterize infantile myofibromatosis do not spread (metastasize), they can grow large enough to damage or compress nearby structures in the body. Pain, which occurs when tumors press against adjacent nerves, can develop. In some people. Tumor growth can also cause bone destruction, disfigurement and even physical limitations.
Infantile myofibromatosis is sometimes broken down into separate types, specifically solitary, multicentric and multicentric with visceral involvement.
Thesolitary formis most common, accounting for approximately 75% of cases. This form occurs predominantly in males and is characterized by one nodule or lesion that most commonly occurs in the skin, often extending into subcutaneous tissue and/or muscle tissue. The nodule is usually found in the head, neck or trunk areas. A solitary nodule of the bone can also occur but is extremely rare.
The multicentric forms are more common in females. Themulticentric form without visceral involvementis characterized by multiple nodules that can arise in different areas of the skin, subcutaneous tissue or muscle. Themulticentric form with visceral involvementis the most severe form of the disorder and is characterized by multiple growths of the skin, muscles and bones along with the involvement of the internal organs such as the lungs, heart and gastrointestinal tract. In some people, only one organ may be involved; in other people, visceral involvement is widespread. This form of infantile myofibromatosis can cause severe, life-threatening complications depending upon the exact location of the lesion and the specific organs involved.

