Infective Endocarditis

synonyms:
bacterial endocarditisIE

overview:
Summary
Infective endocarditis (IE) is an infection of the inner lining of the heart muscle (endocardium) caused by bacteria, fungi or germs that enter through the bloodstream. IE occurs most frequently in patients with abnormal (leaky or narrow) heart valves, artificial (prosthetic) heart valve or in people who have a pacemaker lead. Any structural heart disease can predispose a person to developing IE. In the past, rheumatic fever was the main precursor to IE and remains a common predisposition in developing countries. The presenting symptoms are a low-grade persistent fever without an obvious cause, fatigue and shortness of breath on exertion. Patients also may have joint and muscle pain and their health care provider may hear a new or changing murmur.
The endocardium covers the heart valves, and it is these valves which are primarily affected by infective endocarditis. If the infection remains untreated, multiplying bacteria may eventually destroy the valves and result in heart failure. Bacteria may also form small clots (emboli) which move through the blood and block small arteries. These clots may lodge in various parts of the body including the brain and cause serious damage.
The prevalence of cases of IE has risen in the United States due to the increase in the number of elderly patients receiving invasive surgeries as well as the rise in the number of individuals using IV drugs. Other risk factors include congenital heart disease, prior episode of IE and mitral valve prolapse with leaky valve. Therefore, early diagnosis is key to improving clinical outcomes and survival. Antibiotics are essential for treatment and are most effective if the disease is diagnosed early. However, in many patients, heart surgery is also needed.

Introduction

Endocarditis was first described by William Osler in 1885. Developments in medical science and research in microbiology have contributed to a better understanding of the disease. The most common risk factors for infective endocarditis are previous heart damage, recent heart surgery or poor dental hygiene.

symptoms:
Infective endocarditis is an infection of the valves and/or lining of the heart. The presenting symptoms are a low-grade persistent fever without an obvious cause and fatigue and shortness of breath on exertion. Patients also may have joint pain (arthralgia) and muscle pain (myalgia) and their health care provider may hear a new or changing murmur. In addition, the following signs and symptoms occur:
Heart murmur not previously present or a changed heart murmurPresents in 80% of endocarditis patientsA higher fever of 100 – 103 degrees F.Flu-like symptoms including chillsShortness of breath at restNight sweatsChest pain while breathingSwelling in the feet, legs or abdomenRapid heartbeat (tachycardia)Loss of appetite leading to weight lossBlood or blood cells in the urine (hematuria)Small red spots in the conjunctiva of the eyes and fingernails (splinter hemorrhages)Small painless spots on the palms of the hands or soles of the feet (Janeway lesions)Pain nodules in the fingertips (Osler nodes)
Infection on the heart valve results in destruction of the leaflet tissue, leaking of the valve and heart failure. Extension of infection into tissue next to valve may result in an abscess with rupture between different chambers of the heart. Clots (emboli) resulting from infective endocarditis may produce serious damage. Symptoms depend upon the location of the clot. In 20-40% of individuals with infective endocarditis, clots lodge in the brain and may cause weakness on one side of the body, loss of vision or stroke. Clots may also cause abdominal pain, flank pain, or arterial insufficiency in an extremity. An eye doctor might see bleeding in the back of the eye (Roth spots). Damage from clots may be temporary or permanent.

