IRF6-Related Disorders

synonyms:
lip pits syndrome

overview:
IRF6-related disorders are a group of orofacial clefting disorders including Van der Woude syndrome (VWS) and popliteal pterygium syndrome (PPS). These conditions are caused by mutations in the interferon regulatory factor 6 (IRF6) gene.
Individuals with VWS are at the least severe end of the spectrum. They can have lip pits or cleft lip or cleft palate, or any combination of these anomalies. Individuals with PPS usually have the lip pits, cleft lip and/or cleft palate, with additional skin and limb abnormalities including webbed skin (pterygium) on the backs of both legs (popliteal) and between the legs (intercrural), malformation and/or genital anomalies, webbing or fusion of the fingers and/or toes (syndactyly), adhesion of upper and lower jaw (intraoral adhesions), and adhesion of upper and lower eyelids (ankyloblepharon). A cone-shaped fold of skin on the nail of the big toe is a characteristic finding in PPS.

symptoms:
The symptoms ofIRF6-related disorders vary greatly from person to person. Some affected individuals may have mild clinical signs, while others may exhibit a more severe form of the disease (variable expressivity).
Individuals with VWS can have lip pits alone, cleft lip or cleft palate alone, or any combination of these anomalies. Lip pits usually occur on the lower lip as paired depressions. Less commonly in VWS, one will see conical elevations of the lip, a single lip pit, partial absence of the teeth, incomplete cleft palate, and restricted movement of the tongue (ankyloglossia).
Individuals with PPS typically have a thick web of skin (pterygium) on the backs of both legs (popliteal), extending from the hip (ischial tuberosity) to the heel (calcaneus). In some patients, this abnormal webbing may be present on one leg (unilateral). Such webbing may lead to difficulty walking since full extension of the legs may be limited or the legs may be abnormally rotated (inward or outward).
In most patients, webbed skin may also be present between the legs in the area of the upper inner thighs (intercrural pterygium). Certain joints may be permanently fixed in a flexed position (joint contractures), particularly the knees. Infants with PPS may also exhibit webbing or fusion of one or more fingers and/or toes (syndactyly) and some children may have a triangular (pyramidal) fold of skin that covers the toenails, especially of the big toe. Dimples in the skin of the elbows and knees may also be present.
PPS may also be associated with abnormalities of the face. Most infants have incomplete closure of the roof of mouth (cleft palate) and/or in the upper lip (cleft lip). Children with cleft palate may also be prone to repeated infections of the middle ear (otitis media). Children with PPS may also have abnormal bands of fibrous tissue on the gums (gingival synechiae) and/or between the upper (maxilla) and lower (mandible) bones of the jaws (syngnathia), causing difficulties in opening the mouth. In addition, some affected individuals may have abnormal fibrous tissue connecting the edges of the eyelids (ankyloblepharon filiform) and may exhibit restricted movement of the tongue (ankyloglossia). Many of these facial abnormalities, especially the presence of a cleft palate, can contribute to feeding problems, breathing difficulties, and/or speech impairment.
Individuals affected with PPS may also have abnormalities of the sexual organs (genitalia). In some females, the two long folds of skin on either side of the vaginal opening (labia majora), and/or the uterus may be underdeveloped (hypoplastic). In some patients, the clitoris may be underdeveloped. In some males with this disorder, the scrotum may be abnormally divided (bifid). Rarely, the scrotum may be small (hypoplastic) or absent and, as a result, the testes may remain in the abdomen (undescended testicles). In approximately 40% of affected males who have a scrotum, the testes may also fail to descend from the abdomen into the scrotum (cryptorchidism).
In severe cases of PPS, malformations of the arms and legs (extremities) may be present including absence (agenesis) or underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the fingers and/or toes, abnormal outward (valgus) or inward (varus) bending of the feet, and/or malformation (dysplasia) of the nails.
Growth and intelligence are usually normal inIRF6-related disorders. Exceptions would be if theIRF6genetic change is related to a chromosome change or rearrangement involving theIRF6gene and other genes.

