Isolated Aniridia

synonyms:
irideremia

overview:
Summary
Aniridia is a rare condition characterized by abnormal development of the iris of the eye. The iris is the circular, colored part in the middle of the eyeball. The center of the iris is known as the pupil. The iris can control the size of the pupil, which regulates the amount of light that enters the eye. In aniridia the iris is either partly or completely missing.
Aniridia can be isolated (aniridia without problems in other organs of the body) or can be a part of several genetic syndromes, such as WAGR syndrome and Gillespie syndrome. Aniridia can also be acquired and occur after trauma or ocular surgery. This report discusses isolated aniridia.
Most forms of isolated aniridia are caused by changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in thePAX6gene.
Treatment is focused on preserving and improving vision and may include the use of an artificial iris, medication and surgery.

symptoms:
Aniridia is the partial or complete absence of the iris of the eye. Vision is preserved in some patients with mild cases of aniridia. This condition occurs when the iris fails to develop normally before birth in one or both eyes. Typically, aniridia can be diagnosed at birth. Aniridia can be isolated, i.e., occur as a single abnormality or can be one of many symptoms in an underlying condition.
Isolated aniridia is the partial or complete absence of the iris from birth. Some people with this type of aniridia may be unaware of any eye problems because pupils appear normal and usually only one eye is mildly affected. In more severe cases, isolated aniridia can cause vision problems later in life. Other symptoms can make vision cloudy or blurry and may include:
Clouding of the crystalline lens of the eye (cataracts)Gradual loss of vision due to increased pressure inside the eyeball which may be accompanied by varying degrees of pain (glaucoma)Superficial clouding of the cornea (corneal pannus)Rapid involuntary movement of the eyeball (nystagmus)Underdevelopment of the fovea area of the retina (which controls acute vision)
Aniridia may be part of an underlying condition such as Gillespie syndrome, which includes aniridia, intellectual disability and ataxia among other features, and WAGR syndrome, characterized by a kidney tumor known as Wilm’s tumor and other anomalies such as genital and urinary anomalies and intellectual disability.

