Isovaleric Acidemia

synonyms:
isovaleric acid CoA dehydrogenase deficiencyIVA

overview:
Summary
Isovaleric acidemia is a hereditary metabolic disorder, caused by a change (mutation) in the gene encoding the enzyme isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase, resulting in deficient or absent activity. This enzyme is responsible for helping break down leucine, an amino acid, and its deficiency leads to a buildup of chemicals in the blood that cause symptoms. The disorder can present with acute intermittent attacks in infancy or later in childhood. The acute attacks are characterized by vomiting, refusal to eat, listlessness, abnormal lab values, and a sweaty foot odor. Chronic symptoms include failure to thrive and developmental delay. Management for this disease includes a low protein diet with leucine restriction, avoiding triggers of acute attacks, and supplementation with carnitine and/or glycine. Though there is no cure, but as patients age, acute attacks become less frequent.

symptoms:
Isovaleric acidemia is a rare metabolic disorder that ranges in severity from asymptomatic to mild or life-threatening symptoms depending on the mutation and factors predisposing acute attacks. Two major clinical scenarios are often described, an acute form and a chronic intermittent form, but in reality the disease is best thought of as a continuous spectrum from asymptomatic to life threatening. A characteristic ‘sweaty feet’ odor is often present in patient sweat or cerumen due to a buildup of isovaleric acid. Patients may develop aversion early to protein-rich foods.
Acute, early symptoms present soon after birth with increasing lethargy, poor feeding and vomiting, progressing to coma. These findings are related to chemical imbalances in the baby including an increase in acid, ammonia, and specific toxic compounds derived from isovaleric acid. Prolonged metabolic stress can lead to low levels of certain types of white blood cells (neutropenia) and other cell types (pancytopenia). Patients may also present with lowered body temperature (hypothermia). After resolution of this first attack, patients typically show the chronic intermittent form of the disease unless severe neurologic damage has occurred due to the original presentation.
After the newborn period chronic intermittent symptoms are usual. Patients can have slowed growth rates (failure to thrive), developmental delay, intellectual disability or symptoms affecting the nervous system such as seizures and spasticity, most commonly related to early acute damage. Patients can also experience acute attacks similar to the newborn period, typically triggered by other illnesses such as infections. Patients can exhibit a chronic picture even if a newborn acute attack has not occurred. Recognition of acute neonatal symptoms has led to newborn screening for isovaleric acidemia in the United States and many other developed studies. If identified prior to the development of symptoms, outcomes are generally better, with normal growth and development. About half of babies identified through newborn screening have a very mild deficiency that remains asymptomatic and requires no therapy.

