Jackson-Weiss Syndrome

synonyms:
craniosynostosis, midfacial hypoplasia and foot abnormalitiesJackson-Weiss craniosynostosisJWS

overview:
Summary
Jackson-Weiss syndrome (JWS) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by distinctive malformations of the head and facial (craniofacial) area and abnormalities of the feet. The range and severity of symptoms and findings may be extremely variable, even among affected members of the same family. Primary findings may include premature closure of the fibrous joints (cranial sutures) between certain bones of the skull (craniosynostosis), unusually flat, underdeveloped midfacial regions (midfacial hypoplasia) abnormally broad great toes and/or malformation or fusion of certain bones within the feet. In some patients, JWS is an autosomal dominant genetic condition caused by a change (variant) in theFGFR2gene although variants in other genes (e.g.,FGFR1) can produce a similar appearing condition.
Introduction
JWS was originally described in 1976 (C.E. Jackson) in a large Amish family (kindred). Within this kindred, 88 affected individuals were observed and an additional 50 were known to be affected. Several other families with the disorder have since been described. In addition, isolated cases have been reported in which there was no known family history.
JWS is now known to be a member of a group of conditions caused by variants in theFGFRgenes including Apert syndrome, Crouzon syndrome, Beare-Stevenson syndrome,FGFR2-related isolated coronal synostosis, Pfeiffer syndrome, Crouzon syndrome with acanthosis nigricans and Muenke syndrome.

symptoms:
JWS is typically characterized by craniofacial malformations occurring in association with skeletal abnormalities of the feet, but some affected individuals have no craniofacial abnormalities. The range and severity of associated findings may vary greatly among members of the same or other affected families.
In those with craniofacial abnormalities, such malformations may result in a distinctive facial appearance. For example, there may be premature closure of the fibrous joints (cranial sutures) between bones of the skull (craniosynostosis), causing the top of the head to appear pointed or conical (acrocephalic). In some patients, craniosynostosis may be associated with headaches, disturbances in vision and hydrocephalus, a condition in which there is an abnormal accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the skull. Hydrocephalus often results in increased fluid pressure and abnormal enlargement of the cavities (ventricles) within the brain.
Individuals with JWS may also have additional craniofacial abnormalities. These may include a relatively flat back region of the head (occiput), underdeveloped midfacial regions (midfacial hypoplasia) and widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism). Affected individuals may also have downwardly slanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures), drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis) or abnormal deviation of one eye in relation to the other (strabismus). In some patients, additional features may also be present, such as a flat nasal bridge, an underdeveloped upper jawbone (maxillary hypoplasia), a highly arched roof of the mouth (palate), incomplete closure of the palate (cleft palate) and/or malformed ears. Some affected individuals may have hearing impairment.
JWS may also be characterized by various abnormalities of the feet. For example, affected individuals may have webbed or fused second and third toes (syndactyly) and/or abnormally short, broad great toes that may bend inward (varus deformities). There may also be malformation or fusion of certain bones within the body of the feet (metatarsals), the ankles (tarsal bones) and/or the heels (calcanei). The hands are almost never involved with JWS. Some individuals with JWS may also have additional physical abnormalities such as limitation of joint movements and/or a condition in which the legs are abnormally curved inward, with the knees close together and the ankles widely separated (genu valgum). In addition, although most individuals with the disorder have average or above average intelligence and a normal life span, varying levels of intellectual disability have been reported in a few patients.

