Jervell and Lange-Nielsen Syndrome

synonyms:
autosomal recessive long QT syndrome (LQTS)cardioauditory syndromecardioauditory syndrome of Jervell and Lange-Nielsendeafness, congenital, and functional heart diseaseJervell and Lange-Nielsen (JLNS)surdocardiac syndrome

overview:
Summary

Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome (JLNS) is a rare inherited disorder characterized by deafness present at birth (congenital) occurring in association with abnormalities affecting the electrical system of the heart. The severity of cardiac symptoms associated with JLNS varies from person to person. Some individuals may have no apparent symptoms (asymptomatic); others may develop abnormally increased heartbeats (tachyarrhythmias) resulting in episodes of unconsciousness (syncope), cardiac arrest, and potentially sudden death. Physical activity, excitement, fright, or stress may trigger the onset of these symptoms. Fainting during the aforementioned activities is also a classic sign of JLNS. JLNS is usually detected during early childhood and is inherited as an autosomal recessive genetic disorder. More than half of the untreated cases of JLNS result in death before the age of 15.

Introduction

Anton Jervell and Fred Lange-Nielsen provided the first complete description of the electrical conduction problem in the heart called long QT syndrome (LQTS) in 1957. LQTS refers to the QT-interval measured on the electrocardiogram that indicates that the heart muscle is taking longer than usual to recharge between beats. It predisposes those affected to tachyarrhythmias called torsade de pointes (TdP) which leads to syncope and may cause sudden cardiac death.

symptoms:
Symptoms of JLNS are usually apparent during early childhood. Hearing loss is detected at birth or during early childhood. Hearing loss associated with JLNS is caused by the inability of the auditory nerves to transmit sensory information to the brain (sensorineural hearing loss) and affects both ears (bilateral). In JLNS hearing loss is usually profound, but it tends to affect the hearing of high frequencies more than low frequencies. Low levels of iron and increased levels of gastrin are often present in patients with JLNS, possibly leading to iron deficient anemia.
The most common cardiac symptom associated with JLNS is partial or total loss of consciousness (syncope or fainting) accompanied by abnormally fast heart rhythms known as torsade de pointes (TdPs). TdPs may progress to a more serious condition known as ventricular fibrillation in which the heart’s normal electrical activity becomes disordered resulting in uncoordinated heartbeats and malfunction of the main pumping chambers of the heart (ventricles). Consequently, little or no blood is pumped from the heart. Ventricular fibrillation potentially results in cardiac arrest or sudden death.
Symptoms of JLNS such as syncope tend to occur without warning and to recur unexpectedly. Overexertion, excitement or stress may trigger these recurrent symptoms, although they often begin without any particular cause too. In some cases, episodes may be triggered by “startle” events such as an alarm clock going off or the phone ringing in the middle of the night. The severity and frequency of attacks vary. Some people may have mild chest pain with no loss of consciousness; others may lose consciousness completely or have grand mal seizures followed by a period of disorientation. In some cases seizures may be the first presenting cardiac symptom of JLNS. The severity and frequency of episodes often decrease during middle age. The seizures are frequently misdiagnosed as epilepsy and treated accordingly for several years before the correct diagnosis is made.

