Johanson-Blizzard Syndrome

synonyms:
JBS

overview:
Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS) is an extremely rare genetic disorder that affects multiple organ systems of the body. Many symptoms are present at birth (congenital) or early childhood. The spectrum of potential features and physical findings associated with JBS is wide and varied and can differ dramatically from one person to another. However, characteristic features include insufficient intestinal absorption (malabsorption) of fats and other nutrients due to abnormal development of the pancreas (pancreatic insufficiency); failure to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive) during the first years of life, contributing to short stature; abnormalities of permanent teeth; distinctive abnormalities of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region including a small “beak-shaped” nose; and/or varying degrees of intellectual disability. JBS is caused by mutations to theUBR1gene. This genetic mutation is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.

symptoms:
The features and physical findings associated with JBS can vary greatly from one person to another. It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. However, pancreatic insufficiency, tooth abnormalities, and a characteristic shape of the nose are found in almost all affected individuals. The severity of JBS can vary as well and some infants may develop life-threatening complications during infancy. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
Infants with JBS typically have distinctive craniofacial abnormalities at birth. The most striking, constant craniofacial feature associated with JBS is an unusually small nose that appears “beak-shaped” due to absence (aplasia) or underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the nasal wings (nasal alae). In addition, some affected infants may have a small, underdeveloped upper jaw (maxillary hypoplasia), a small pointed chin, a long, narrow upper lip and microcephaly, a condition in which a child’s head circumference is smaller than would be expected for age and gender. Some affected infants may not have the small openings in the inner corners of the eyelids where tears normally drain (lacrimal puncta aplasia), and/or an abnormal passage that carries tears directly from the interior opening of the nasal passage to the surface of the skin (nasolacrimo-cutaneous fistula). In some instances more severe facial clefting has been observed including cleft lip and palate and lateral facial clefts extending from the nasal region to the lower eyelid.
Infants with JBS may have a low birth weight and generalized poor muscle tone (hypotonia). Without treatment infants usually fail to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Eventually, affected individuals may exhibit short stature. Affected infants and children may also experience delays in achieving developmental milestones (developmental delays) and exhibit varying degrees of intellectual disability. Although intellectual disability does occur, in some cases, intelligence is normal. Hearing loss or deafness may be present at birth or may develop later during life.
Growth deficiency associated with JBS may occur because of malabsorption and exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. Pancreatic insufficiency is a common, prominent feature of JBS. Without treatment, impairment of the pancreas and malabsorption can progress to cause life-threatening complications. The pancreas is a small gland located behind the stomach. It contains specialized exocrine cells that secrete enzymes that travel to the intestines and aid in digestion. Pancreatic cells called “acinar cells” produce such digestive enzymes. In JBS, however, affected individuals lack a sufficient number of properly functioning acinar cells, and pancreatic tissue may be replaced by abnormal accumulations of fat. As a result, there is a deficiency in the amount of digestive enzymes required to break down food (exocrine pancreatic insufficiency), which, in turn, prevents fats and other essential nutrients from being absorbed properly (malabsorption) in the intestines.
In individuals with JBS, intestinal malabsorption results in large, loose, foul smelling stools that contain an excessive amount of fat (steatorrhea) and other nutrients. In addition to failure to thrive, pancreatic insufficiency may result in deficiencies of certain vitamins (e.g., vitamins A, D, and/or E), chronic anemia, low levels of calcium in the blood (hypocalcemia), and additional nutritional deficiencies. For example, affected infants experience protein loss characterized by abnormally decreased levels of protein in the blood (hypoproteinemia), which, in turn, leads to excessive accumulation of body fluids (edema) in the soft layers of tissue under the skin.
In one report in the medical literature, an infant with suspected JBS did not have evidence of pancreatic insufficiency. Some researchers believe that the pancreatic defect may be progressive and may not be detectable or readily apparent during early infancy in all cases.
Eventually, it is possible that endocrine pancreatic insufficiency will develop. Endocrine cells are cells in the pancreas that secrete several hormones that have specialized functions within the body. Insulin is the most important pancreatic hormone. Lack of appropriate insulin production results in diabetes.
Many infants with JBS may also have characteristic abnormalities of the hair and scalp. For example, the scalp hair, which is often blond, may be unusually sparse, dry, and coarse. Affected infants may also lack of skin and hair (aplasia cutis) by the soft spots in the front and back of the skull (anterior and posterior fontanelles). In many cases, during later childhood, there may also be abnormal bald patches (alopecia) on the scalp where skin dimples were previously apparent at birth.
Most affected infants and children also have distinctive abnormalities of the teeth. The primary (deciduous) teeth may be abnormally small (microdontia), cone-shaped, and widely spaced, with short, malformed, irregular roots. The majority of the secondary (permanent) teeth are absent. The teeth that do appear may also be abnormally small and malformed with short, misshapen roots.
Approximately 40 percent of affected individuals also demonstrate abnormally decreased activity of the thyroid gland and underproduction of thyroid hormones (hypothyroidism). The thyroid gland, located at the base of the neck, secretes hormones (e.g., thyroxine) that play an essential role in regulating the rates of metabolism and growth. Symptoms associated with hypothyroidism, which tend to be progressive in nature, usually become apparent during childhood; however, in rare cases, they may begin to occur during early infancy. In affected individuals, hypothyroidism may result in generalized weakness and fatigue and may contribute to growth retardation and abnormal delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and physical activity (psychomotor retardation).
Some infants and children with JBS may have additional abnormalities including the persistence of the anal membrane, causing full or partial closure of the anus (imperforate anus or anal stenosis), which, in turn, prevents the normal passage of bowel contents. In some cases, affected individuals may also have abnormalities of the genital and urinary (genitourinary) tracts. In affected males, such malformations may include abnormal placement of the urinary opening (meatus) on the underside of the penis (hypospadias) and/or an abnormally small penis (micropenis). Affected females may have an abnormal partition dividing the vagina (double or septate vagina), unusual enlargement of the elongated organ partially enclosed within the folds of skin surrounding the vaginal opening (clitoromegaly), an abnormal passage joining the vagina and the tubular structure through which urine is excreted (urethrovaginal fistula), and a single urogenital opening (orifice). In addition, in some cases, affected males and females may demonstrate abnormal swelling (distention) of and accumulation of urine in the kidneys (hydronephrosis).
Infants and children with JBS can potentially develop additional finding and physical features including small, underdeveloped nipples, reversal of the normal position of certain organs within the chest (situs inversus), congenital heart defects, decreased function of the pituitary gland (hypopituitarism), and an abnormally high susceptibility to repeated infections. Congenital heart defects may include “holes” in the fibrous partition (septum) separating the upper or lower chambers of the heart (atrial septal defects [ASDs] or ventricular septal defects [VSDs]) as well as weakening of the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy). Hypopituitarism can cause a wide variety of symptoms. Growth hormone deficiency and juvenile onset diabetes have also been reported in individuals with JBS.

