Joubert Syndrome

synonyms:
cerebellooculorenal syndrome 1; CORS1cerebelloparenchchymal disorder IV familialJoubert-Bolthauser syndrome

overview:
Summary
Joubert syndrome (JS) is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder that affects the area of the brain that controls balance and coordination known as the cerebellum. This condition is characterized by a specific finding on an MRI called a “molar tooth sign” in which the cerebellar vermis of the brain is absent or underdeveloped and the brain stem is abnormal. The most common features of Joubert syndrome are lack of muscle control (ataxia), abnormal breathing patterns (hyperpnea), sleep apnea, abnormal eye and tongue movements and low muscle tone.
Introduction
Joubert syndrome was originally described by pediatric neurologist, Dr. Marie Joubert, and her colleagues in 1969 in four siblings with underdeveloped cerebellar vermis who had symptoms of hypernea (forced respiration), abnormal eye movements, ataxia and intellectual disability. Several years later, the specific brain malformation, the “molar tooth sign”, was first detected in patients with Joubert syndrome. Since then, a number of genes related to Joubert syndrome have been identified in various populations.

symptoms:
Many of the clinical symptoms of Joubert syndrome are apparent in infancy and most affected children have delays in gross motor milestones. The most common features are lack of muscle control (ataxia), abnormal breathing patterns (hyperpnea), sleep apnea, abnormal eye and tongue movements and low muscle tone. Intellect ranges from normal to severe intellectual disability. Joubert syndrome is characterized by a specific finding on an MRI called a “molar tooth sign” in which the cerebellar vermis of the brain is absent or underdeveloped and the brain stem is abnormal.
In addition to these core features, the majority of individuals with JS also have involvement of other body systems including the eye, kidney, liver and skeleton. Therefore, JS is considered a multisystem disorder, and several of the additional features may be progressive. Some of the other problems that may be associated with Joubert syndrome include eye abnormalities such as abnormal development of the retina, abnormality in the iris (coloboma), abnormal eye movements (nystagmus), crossed eyes (strabismus) and drooping eyelids (ptosis). Other problems sometimes associated with Joubert syndrome include kidney and/or liver abnormalities, extra fingers and toes (polydactyly), a gap in the skull with protrusion of the membranes that cover the brain (encephalocele) and hormone abnormalities.
There are several subtypes of Joubert syndrome depending on clinical signs and symptoms. There is Joubert syndrome with retinal disease (JS-Ret), Joubert syndrome with renal disease (JS-Ren), Joubert syndrome with oculorenal disease (JS-OR), Joubert syndrome with hepatic disease (JS-H), Joubert syndrome with oral-facial-digital features (JS-OFD) and a couple other less common clinical subtypes. Joubert syndrome with retinal disease (JS-Ret) is characterized by a pigmentary retinopathy that may be indistinguishable from classic retinitis pigmentosa. It can occasionally be severe with neonatal onset of congenital blindness; however, the retinal disease may not be progressive and is not always present in infancy or early childhood. Joubert syndrome with renal disease (JS-Ren) has been described traditionally in two forms – nephronophthisis (kidney inflammation and scarring) and polycystic kidney disease; however, these now appear to be part of a continuum with the specific renal manifestation varying by stage of renal disease. In Joubert syndrome with oculorenal disease (JS-OR), retinal disease and renal impairment often occur together in the same individual. Joubert syndrome with hepatic disease (JS-H) usually presents with hepatic (liver) fibrosis that is usually progressive but rarely symptomatic at birth. In Joubert syndrome with oral-facial-digital features (JS-OFD), oral findings can include midline upper-lip cleft, midline groove of tongue, hamartomas of the alveolar ridge and cleft palate. Craniofacial features often include wide-spaced eyes, low-set ears and small jaw (micrognathia).
Joubert syndrome is a very variable condition, and the full spectrum of symptoms has not yet been determined. Several conditions have been described in which the “molar tooth sign” and characteristics of Joubert syndrome are present in addition to other findings. It is not yet clear if these conditions are variants of Joubert syndrome or separate syndromes. These conditions have been termed “Joubert syndrome and related disorders”.

