Juvenile Hemochromatosis

synonyms:
hereditary hemochromatosis type 2juvenile hereditary hemochromatosistype 2 hereditary hemochromatosis

overview:
Juvenile hemochromatosis is a rare genetic disorder characterized by the accumulation of iron in various organs of the body. Symptoms usually become apparent before the age of 30, though they may appear at a later age in some individuals. The specific symptoms and severity of juvenile hemochromatosis vary from one person to another. Common symptoms include absent or decreased function of the testes in males or ovaries in females (hypogonadotropic hypogonadism), heart (cardiac) disease, scarring of the liver (cirrhosis), joint disease, diabetes and dark discoloration of patches of skin (hyperpigmentation). If untreated, juvenile hemochromatosis can potentially cause life-threatening complications. Juvenile hemochromatosis is caused by mutations in one of two genes (HJVandHAMP). Juvenile hemochromatosis is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
Symptoms of juvenile hemochromatosis resemble those seen in the more commonHFE-related hemochromatosis, also called classic hereditary hemochromatosis. However, juvenile hemochromatosis is a separate, distinct disorder that occurs at an earlier age and is typically more severe thanHFE-related hemochromatosis.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of juvenile hemochromatosis can vary from one person to another, even within the same family. Major symptoms include hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and heart, liver and joint disease. In some patients, nonspecific, vague symptoms may precede the development of more serious complications. These earlier symptoms may include fatigue, joint pain (arthralgia) and lack of appetite. If left untreated, juvenile hemochromatosis can cause serious, life-threatening complications.
The symptoms of juvenile hemochromatosis usually become apparent at some point before 30 years of age. However, in rare cases, some individuals have not developed symptoms until their 30s.
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is characterized by absent or decreased function of the testes in males or ovaries in females. Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism can result in delays in puberty, loss of sexual hair, impotence in men (erectile dysfunction) and a reduction or absence of the menstrual cycle for six months in girls who have already started menstruation (secondary amenorrhea). Lack of a sex drive and infertility may also be associated with this condition. Prolonged hypogonadism can result in low bone density (osteopenia) and fragile bones that are prone to fracture (osteoporosis).
Heart abnormalities can develop in individuals with juvenile hemochromatosis. Many individuals with juvenile hemochromatosis develop disease of the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy), irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias) and/or heart failure. Proper treatment can prevent the development of heart disease or improve heart health; however, without proper iron removal treatment, sudden death due to heart abnormalities can occur. In some patients, heart disease may be the first noticeable sign of juvenile hemochromatosis.
Additional symptoms associated with juvenile hemochromatosis include a progressive darkening of patches of skin (skin hyperpigmentation), joint pain (arthralgia) and liver disease, eventually resulting in enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly) and scarring (cirrhosis).
Patients with juvenile hemochromatosis can also have diabetes. Diabetes is a common disorder in which the body does not produce enough or is unable to properly use insulin. The most obvious symptoms are unusually excessive thirst and urination. Uncontrolled diabetes can lead to serious health complications such as heart disease. Individuals will need to be treated for diabetes independent of their treatment for juvenile hemochromatosis.
Rarely, affected individuals may experience an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism) or inadequate production of the steroid hormones cortisol and aldosterone (adrenocortical insufficiency).

