Juvenile Myelomonocytic Leukemia

synonyms:
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia of infancyJMMLjuvenile chronic myelogenous leukemia (old literature)

overview:
Summary
Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) is a rare form of blood cancer. JMML predominately affects young children, most often developing in children under the age of 4. The male/female ratio of affected children is 2-3:1. The disorder is characterized by the uncontrolled growth of an immature form of a specific type of white blood cell known as monocytes. These abnormal cells accumulate in the bone marrow crowding out other healthy cells. The bone marrow produces specialized cells (hematopoietic stem cells) that grow and eventually develop into red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets. These cells are released into the bloodstream to travel throughout the body and perform specific functions. Red blood cells deliver oxygen to the body; white blood cells help the body to fight infection; and platelets allow the body to form clots to stop bleeding. When abnormal cells accumulate in the bone marrow, they can affect the production and function of these healthy blood cells. JMML cells can accumulate in other organs of the body including the lungs, skin, liver, and intestines. JMML is an aggressive and difficult to treat disease but is currently cured in about 50% of cases. Currently, the only effective treatment for most patients is allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). The exact, underlying causes of JMML are unknown, but nearly all patients will have a mutation that changes the DNA inside their blood cells in aRASgene or in a gene that controls the activation levels of Ras proteins.
Introduction
Over the years, several different classification systems have been used to define JMML. Currently, the World Health Organization (WHO) classifies JMML as an overlap myelodysplastic syndrome/myeloproliferative disorder because JMML shares characteristics with both of these groups of disorders. Myelodysplastic syndromes are defined as a group of disorders that are characterized by disordered development of blood cells in the bone marrow that lead to cytopenias (low red cell and platelet count). Myeloproliferative disorders are defined as a group of disorders characterized by the overproduction (proliferation) of the three main blood cell lines, red or white blood cells or platelets. The first case of JMML was described in the medical literature in 1924.

symptoms:
Although the symptoms below are common to JMML, affected children can potentially exhibit these symptoms in any combination. Among individual cases, the specific symptoms and signs can vary. Symptoms can develop over a period of weeks or months.
Pallor, fatigue, weakness, fevers, and a dry cough are common symptoms of JMML. Pallor is specifically described as an abnormal paleness of the skin. In some cases, affected children may develop an abnormally enlarged liver and/or spleen (hepatosplenomegaly), which can cause a swollen (distended) abdomen and result in labored breathing and a lack of appetite. The liver may be mildly or markedly enlarged, but the spleen is usually markedly increased in size. Abnormally enlarged lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy) can also occur.
Certain symptoms in children with JMML may result from abnormal bone marrow function due to cancer cells crowding out healthy cells. Anemia occurs when there are low levels of circulating red blood cells and may be associated with pallor, fatigue, nausea and lightheadedness. Thrombocytopenia occurs when there are low levels of platelets resulting in easy bruising and bleeding of the skin, mouth, and nose. Although individuals with JMML have too many white blood cells, these cells do not function normally and affected children may develop recurrent infections such as bronchitis and tonsillitis.
Decreased appetite, poor weight gain, irritability, and failure to thrive may also occur in children with JMML. Some affected children may develop café au lait spots, which are smooth coffee-colored lesions on the skin, and a maculopapular rash, which is a red rash characterized by raised spotted lesions. Rarely, these rashes represent infiltration of the leukemia cells into the skin. Bone and joint pain has also been reported in affected children.
In very rare cases, certain children with specific gene mutations have experienced spontaneously resolution of their condition. Unfortunately, it is very challenging to identify these patients at diagnosis.

