Juvenile CLN3 Disease

synonyms:
CLN3CLN3-NCLJNCLjuvenile Batten diseasejuvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosisneuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 3Spielmeyer-Sjogren diseaseVogt-Spielmeyer diseaseVogt-Spielmeyer-Sjogren disease

overview:
Summary
Juvenile CLN3 disease, a rare genetic disorder, belongs to a group of progressive degenerative neurometabolic disorders known as the neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses. These disorders share certain similar symptoms and are distinguished in part by the age at which such symptoms appear. Juvenile CLN3 disease was previously called juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs). The NCLs are characterized by abnormal accumulation of certain fatty, granular substances (i.e., pigmented lipids [lipopigments] ceroid and lipofuscin) within nerve cells (neurons) of the brain as well as other tissues of the body that may result in progressive deterioration (atrophy) of certain areas of the brain, neurological impairment, and other characteristic symptoms and physical findings.
The symptoms of juvenile CLN3 disease usually become apparent between 5 and 15 years of age when progressive loss of vision, seizures, and progressive neurological degeneration develop. In some individuals, initial symptoms may be less obvious and include clumsiness, balance problems and behavioral or personality changes. Juvenile CLN3 disease is caused by changes (mutations) of theCLN3gene and is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. It is the most common form of NCL, is found worldwide, and is found particularly in families of Northern European or Scandinavian ancestry.
Introduction
For many years, the term Batten disease was used to describe the classic juvenile form of NCL (JNCL). Other terms in Scandinavian countries included Vogt-Spielmeyer-Sjogren disease. Recently, families, clinicians and researchers have begun to prefer the use of the term Batten disease to collectively describe all types of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses.

symptoms:
The symptoms of juvenile CLN3 disease usually become apparent between 5 and 15 years of age, usually with visual abnormalities that progresses rapidly. Affected children also suffer from problems with their speech, cognitive decline, behavioral changes, and motor decline.
An early finding in juvenile CLN3 disease is the progressive loss of vision characterized by macular degeneration, deterioration of the nerves of the eyes (optic nerves) that transmit impulses from the nerve-rich membrane lining the eyes (retina) to the brain (optic atrophy), and abnormal accumulation of colored (pigmented) material on the retinas (retinitis pigmentosa). Retinitis pigmentosa eventually causes degeneration of the retina leading to progressive loss of vision, and may be the first initial diagnosis. Children with juvenile CLN3 disease often lose their sight by the age of 10.
In some children, the first signs of juvenile CLN3 disease are episodes of uncontrolled electrical disturbances in the brain (seizures) and the loss of previously acquired physical and mental abilities (developmental regression). As affected individuals age, seizures worsen, signs of dementia become apparent, and motor abnormalities similar to those seen in Parkinson’s disease develop. During this period, behavioral and personality changes often occur including mood disturbances, anxiety, psychotic states (such as explosive, unprovoked laughing and/or crying), and hallucinations. Speech disturbances such as stuttering may also occur.
Eventually, usually during the late teens or twenties, additional abnormalities develop including sudden involuntary muscle contractions (myoclonus), muscle spasms (spasticity) that result in slow, stiff movements of the legs, weakness or paralysis of all four limbs (quadriparesis), and sleep disturbances. In most cases, progressive neurological and mental degeneration leaves affected individuals bedridden and unable to communicate easily and eventually results in life-threatening complications by the twenties or thirties.

