Juvenile Ossifying Fibroma

synonyms:
JOF

overview:
Summary
Juvenile ossifying fibroma is a rare and non-cancerous overgrowth of bone in the face or jaw. There are two subtypes of juvenile ossifying fibroma called psammomatoid juvenile ossifying fibroma (PsJOF) and trabecular juvenile ossifying fibroma (TrJOF). Both subtypes primarily affect the bones of the face. PsJOF predominantly affects the bones of the eye and nose and mostly manifests in patients aged 16-33 years. TrJOF predominantly affects the bones of the upper and lower jaw and most commonly affects patients around the age of 8 years. Both forms affect males and females equally.
JOF is considered a “fibro-osseous lesion” as it is characterized by overgrowth of bone. Both forms of JOF present with slow or rapid, mostly painless, progressive bony overgrowth of the face or jaw. Symptoms may include nasal congestion/ obstruction, eye bulging or double vision. Regardless of type, surgical removal of affected bone is the primary method of treatment. Depending on the amount of bone removed, additional reconstructive or cosmetic surgeries may be required. Due to the high recurrence rate of JOF, continued post-surgical follow-up is essential. The exact cause of JOF is currently unknown and most cases occur sporadically in patients without any family history of the condition.
Introduction
JOF and its subtypes are diagnosed based on the age of the patient affected and biopsy of the bony overgrowth and its location. JOF is not cancerous but may damage surrounding structures or cause significant disfigurement. Patients are often asymptomatic but due to the progressive nature of the lesion, early diagnosis allows for resection of a smaller lesion and less chance of damage to nearby structures.

symptoms:
Most patients with JOF are asymptomatic and have lesions identified incidentally through unrelated imaging such as dental x-rays.
As the fibroma expands either slowly or rapidly, patients may experience non-specific symptoms such as sinus infections (sinusitis), runny nose (rhinorrhea), nosebleeds (epistaxis), nasal obstruction, facial enlargement/changing shape, visual changes, blindness, eyelid drooping (ptosis), bulging of the eye(s) (proptosis/exophthalmos), pain/difficulty with eye movement or papilledema (optic disc bulging) depending on the bones affected. Pain and numbness are often absent but do rarely occur.

