Juvenile Pilocytic Astrocytoma

synonyms:
Astrocytoma Grade IJPA

overview:
Juvenile pilocytic astrocytoma (JPA) is a rare childhood brain tumor. In most cases, the tumor is a benign, slow growing tumor that usually does not spread to surrounding brain tissue. Symptoms of a JPA will vary depending upon the size and location of the tumor. Most symptoms result from increased pressure on the brain and include headaches, nausea, vomiting, balance problems and vision abnormalities.
A JPA develops from certain star-shaped brain cells called astrocytes. Astrocytes and similar cells form tissue that surrounds and protects other nerve cells found within the brain and spinal cord. Collectively, these cells are known as glial cells and the tissue they form is known as glial tissue. Tumors that arise from glial tissue, including astrocytomas, are collectively referred to as gliomas.
Astrocytomas are classified according to a grading system developed by the World Health Organization (WHO). Astrocytomas come in four grades based upon how fast the cells are reproducing and that likelihood that they will spread (infiltrate) nearby tissue. Grades I or II astrocytomas are nonmalignant and may be referred to as low-grade. JPA are Grade I tumors and, unlike the low grade astrocytomas of adults, rarely up-grade and become malignant. Grades III and IV astrocytomas are malignant and may be referred to as high-grade astrocytomas. Anaplastic astrocytomas are grade III astrocytomas. Grade IV astrocytomas are known as glioblastoma multiforme.

symptoms:
The symptoms associated with juvenile pilocytic astrocytomas vary depending upon the size and location of the tumor. A JPA can develop anywhere with the central nervous system (i.e., brain and spinal cord). Most cases arise in the lower area of brain near the back of the neck that controls movement and balance (cerebellum), the brainstem, the hypothalamic region or the optic nerve pathways.
The most common finding associated with a JPA is increased pressure within the brain, which may be caused by the tumor itself or by blockage of the fluid-filled spaces in the brain called ventricles, which results in the abnormal accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the brain. Symptoms commonly associated with increased pressure on the brain include headaches, lethargy or drowsiness, vomiting, and changes in personality or mental status. In some cases, a JPA may also be associated with seizures, vision problems such as blurred vision or double vision (diplopia), gradual changes in behavior or mood, and weakness of the arms and legs resulting in coordination difficulties.
A JPA in the brainstem may be associated with nausea, vomiting, an impaired ability to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia), and wryneck (torticollis). Ocular symptoms including swelling of the optic disc (papilledema) and involuntary rapid eye movements (nystagmus) may also occur. In some cases, paralysis (palsy) of the sixth and seventh cranial nerves may develop.
A JPA in the optic nerve pathways may be associated with loss of vision, degeneration (atrophy) of the optic nerve, papilledema, nystagmus, and protrusion of the eyeball (proptosis).
A JPA in the hypothalamic region may be associated with weight gain or loss, premature puberty or diencephalic syndrome, which is characterized by failure to thrive, abnormal thinness, irritability, and eye abnormalities.

