Kabuki Syndrome

synonyms:
Kabuki makeup syndromeKMSNiikawa-Kuroki syndrome

overview:
Summary
Kabuki syndrome is a rare, multisystem disorder characterized by multiple abnormalities including distinctive facial features, growth delays, varying degrees of intellectual disability, skeletal abnormalities and short stature. A wide variety of additional symptoms affecting multiple different organ systems can potentially occur. The specific symptoms associated with Kabuki syndrome can vary greatly from one person to another. To date, changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in one of two genes lead to Kabuki syndrome. The first gene isKMT2D(formerlyMLL2) and the second gene, which accounts for fewer cases of Kabuki syndrome, isKDM6A. Clinical genetic testing is available for both genes.
Introduction
Kabuki syndrome was first reported in the medical literature in 1981 by Japanese physicians. The disorder was originally called Kabuki-makeup syndrome because the facial features of many affected children resembled the makeup used by actors in kabuki, a form of Japanese theater. The term “makeup” has since been dropped and the preferred term for the disorder is Kabuki syndrome.

symptoms:
Some features of Kabuki syndrome are present at birth (congenital). Other features become apparent as an affected child ages. The specific findings and the severity of those findings can vary from one person to another. A wide variety of findings affecting multiple organ systems of the body can potentially occur. It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all the features discussed below. Parents of an affected child should talk to their physician and medical team about their child’s specific case, associated features and overall prognosis.
Children with Kabuki syndrome have a distinctive facial appearance, which includes abnormally long openings between the eyelids (palpebral fissures), lower eyelids that are turned outward (everted), prominent eyelashes, arched eyebrows, a broad nose with a flattened or depressed tip, and large, misshaped ears. The distinctive facial appearance associated with Kabuki syndrome develops slowly over several years. Additional facial features include a bluish tinge to the whites of the eyes (blue sclerae), drooping of the upper eyelid (ptosis), misaligned eyes (strabismus), a highly arched roof of the mouth or a cleft palate, depressions involving the inside of the lower lips (lip pits) and an abnormally small jaw (micrognathia).
Growth deficiency is common in individuals with Kabuki syndrome, usually becoming apparent during the first year of life (postnatal growth deficiency). Growth deficiency can become more noticeable as affected children grow older. Eventually, affected individuals may be notably below average height for their age (short stature). In rare cases, some children may have partial growth hormone deficiency.
In addition to growth deficiency, children with Kabuki syndrome may also have mild to moderate intellectual disability. Severe intellectual disability is extremely rare, and some children have no intellectual disability. Some children may have seizures, diminished muscle tone (hypotonia) and microcephaly, a condition in which the circumference of the head is abnormally small. Seizures can develop right after birth (neonatal period) or as late as 12 years of age. One rare cause of seizures occurring right after birth is very low blood sugar due to too much insulin (hyperinsulinism). This requires immediate treatment to avoid damage to the brain. All neonates with a known or suspected diagnosis of Kabuki syndrome should undergo routine blood sugar monitoring for the first few days of life. If an infant has low blood sugar after birth, further blood studies should be completed to evaluate for hyperinsulinism. This evaluation is typically done in consultation with a hormone specialist (endocrinologist).
Some children with Kabuki syndrome experience speech delays. Palate abnormalities and hearing loss may contribute to speech delays. Some children with Kabuki syndrome may develop behavioral abnormalities including anxiousness and a tendency to fixate on objects or activities. They may also dislike certain stimuli including certain noises, smells or textures. Some children with Kabuki syndrome appear to be particularly fond of music. A learning environment that stresses audio-verbal learning over visual learning may be helpful.
Children with Kabuki syndrome may also have feeding difficulties including gastroesophageal reflux, poor sucking ability, and difficulty absorbing or digesting nutrients from food (malabsorption). Consequently, many affected children may fail to gain weight and grow at the rate expected for children of their age and sex (failure to thrive). However, as children enter adolescents, they tend to gain too much weight, which can make other health problems (such as joint dislocations) worse. Some children may be susceptible to recurring infections including upper respiratory infections and pneumonia. Therefore, all children should undergo a baseline evaluation for an abnormality of how the immune system works (an immunodeficiency). Many children have recurrent ear infections (otitis media) which may contribute to hearing loss.
Dental abnormalities such as missing, misaligned or misshaped teeth have been reported. Small and/or thin fingernails and toenails are sometimes seen. In addition, some children will have a feature of the fingertips, known as persistent fetal fingertip pads.
Skeletal abnormalities may occur in some patients including abnormally short fingers and toes (brachydactyly), pinkies that are bent (clinodactyly), flat feet, loose (lax) joints, abnormalities of the vertebrae, cranial malformations and abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis or kyphosis). Affected individuals may also be prone to dislocating their hips or kneecaps.
Some children with Kabuki syndrome may have certain heart abnormalities that are present from birth (congenital heart defects). The two most reported heart defects in children with Kabuki syndrome include narrowing of the main artery of the body (coarctation of the aorta) and holes in the membranes (septa) that separate the chambers of the heart (ventricular or atrial septal defects).
In some patients, additional features involving a variety of organ systems may also be present. Possible kidney (renal) abnormalities include malformation or underdevelopment of the kidneys (renal dysplasia or hypoplasia), obstruction of the normal flow of urine from the kidneys (hydronephrosis) and fusion of the kidneys at the base forming a horseshoe shape (horseshoe kidneys). Gastrointestinal abnormalities include malrotation of the colon and absence or blockage of the anal opening (anal atresia). Immunological deficiencies and/or a higher chance of developing autoimmune disorders have also been reported. Affected females may also experience early onset of breast development (premature thelarche), although this typically does not require treatment., Some males may have undescended testicles (cryptorchidism), which frequently requires treatment.

