KAT6A Syndrome

overview:
Summary
KAT6A syndrome is an extremely rare genetic neurodevelopmental disorder in which there is a variation (mutation) in the KAT6A gene. Variations in theKAT6Agene can potentially cause a wide variety of signs and symptoms; how the disorder affects one child can be very different from how it affects another. Neurodevelopmental disorders are ones that impair or alter the growth and development of the brain and the central nervous system. Common symptoms include varying degrees of intellectual disability, delays in reaching developmental milestones (developmental delays), delays in being able to speak and communicate (speech delays) and diminished muscle tone (hypotonia). Additional symptoms including abnormalities affecting the heart, eyes and gastrointestinal system can also occur. In most instances, variations in theKAT6Agene occur spontaneously and there is no family history of the disorder (de novo variations). Treatment is based on the specific symptoms present in each individual.

symptoms:
Although researchers have been able to establish a clear syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about KAT6A syndrome is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified cases, the lack of large clinical studies, and the possibility of additional genes, environmental factors, or other factors influencing the disorder have prevented physicians and researchers from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis.
The potential symptoms associated with a variation in theKAT6Agene are numerous and highly variable. With genetic disorders, the specific type of variation (e.g., type of mutation, or location in the gene) can be associated more often with specific symptoms. This is called genotype-phenotype correlation. Researchers continue to determine whether there are any specific genotype-phenotype correlations in KAT6A syndrome. It is important to note that every child is unique and that affected individuals may not have all the symptoms discussed below. How the disorder affects one child can be very different from how it affects another child.
Almost all children with KAT6A syndrome have intellectual disability. Intellectual disability can range from mild to severe. The degree of intellectual disability may be hard to determine at first, because other symptoms may make evaluation difficult. Standardized measures used to assess intellectual functions often rely on speech and communication abilities. With delays in these abilities, it is challenging to fully map out the neuropsychological profile of children with KAT6A gene variation. Most children experience delays in reaching developmental milestones like sitting up or crawling.
Severe speech, language and communication difficulties are present in KAT6A syndrome. Most children are minimally verbal and alternative/augmentative communication approaches are required for many into adult life. Receptive language skills are relatively better than expressive language skills, which means that children with KAT6A gene variation can understand more information spoken to them than they are able to speak themselves. Some children may improve language skills, more in the receptive domain compared to the expressive, but others may remain relatively limited in their speech abilities or nonverbal through adulthood.
Affected infants may have microcephaly, a condition in which the circumference of the head is smaller than would otherwise be expected based on age and gender. Less often, affected infants have craniosynostosis, which is a general term for the improper development of the bones of the skull, which can result in an abnormal head shape in affected individuals. Craniosynostosis refers to the premature fusion of the fibrous joints (sutures) between certain bones of the skull. The severity of primary craniosynostosis can vary from one person to another.
As affected infants age, they may experience feeding difficulties because of problems with the movements of the muscles of the face (oromotor dysfunction). Some children have difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), and there can be a risk of food, liquid or other foreign material accidentally going into the lungs (aspiration). Infants can have additional symptoms involving the gastrointestinal tract including backflow of the contents of the stomach into the esophagus (gastroesophageal reflux), constipation, and abnormally twisting or rotation of the intestines (intestinal malrotation), which can cause pain and bowel obstruction. Bowel obstruction can be life-threating if not treated promptly. Based on a parent report published on the KAT6 Foundation’s page, untreated bowel obstructions are the leading cause of death among children affected by the KAT6A gene variation.
Some affected individuals have heart defects that are present from birth (congenital heart defects). These can include atrial and ventricular septal defects. Septal defects are when there is a ‘hole’ in the membrane (septum) that separates the two lower chambers of the heart, called the ventricles, or in the membrane that separates the two upper chambers of the heart, called the atria. The size of these ‘holes will determine whether any symptoms are present, and how severe these symptoms may be. Additional congenital heart defects can include an abnormal opening between the main artery of the lungs (pulmonary artery) and the aorta (patent ductus arteriosus), and patent foreman ovale, in which the normal hole between the two atria that allows blood to bypass the fetal lungs, fails to close as it normally should.
Some infants and children have distinctive facial features. This can include a broad tip of the nose, which can become more pronounced as a child grows older. Additional features include a thin upper lip, low-set ears, a prominent bridge of the nose, and narrowing of the temporal bones that make up the sides and base of the skull. Additional features include a droopy eyelid (ptosis), downturned corners of the mouth and an abnormally small jaw (micrognathia). The eyes can be misaligned (strabismus), and sometimes vision may be reduced because the eye and brain are not working together properly (amblyopia). Less often, additional eye symptoms can occur including nearsightedness (myopia), farsightedness (hypermetropia), and rapid, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus). Teeth abnormalities are common and include peg-shaped teeth, abnormally small teeth, extra (supernumerary) teeth, and crowding of the teeth.
Behavioral issues are common in KAT6A syndrome. Some children display some of the signs and symptoms that are seen in children on the autism spectrum. Such behavioral issues can include temper tantrums, hand flapping and other repetitive behaviors, inappropriate laughing, frustration, and anxiety. Coping with everyday demands that includes self-care and interacting with others can be challenging for children with KAT6A gene variation. According to the KAT6 Foundation and the medical literature, many parents have reported that their children are happy, sociable and good natured.
Many affected individuals have difficulties with sleep such as difficult falling asleep and remaining asleep. A few individuals have developed obstructive sleep apnea. Sleep apnea is a condition characterized by temporary, recurrent interruptions of breathing during sleep. Symptoms include frequent interruptions of sleep at night and excessive sleepiness during the day. To manage sleep issues, parents of children with KAT6A gene variation often seek medical advice and rely on medications.
Additional symptoms that have been reported include cleft palate and weakened cartilage of the walls of the bronchial tubes (bronchomalacia). Some individuals experience recurrent infections, including repeated middle ear infections (otitis media) or respiratory infections. Some individuals have developed seizures, complex movement disorders, or an excessive startle reaction. There are also a few children who have had pinkies that are fixed or “locked” in a bent or curved position (clinodactyly) or abnormally short fingers (brachydactyly). In boys, there may be a delay or failure of the testes to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism).
There are several different symptoms that have been identified in only one or a few individuals. Researchers are not sure yet whether these are potential symptoms of KAT6A syndrome, or coincidental findings resulting from another cause. Such symptoms include food allergy or intolerance, short stature and abnormalities associated with the pituitary gland. Deficiency or abnormality of the immune system, which can contribute to repeated infections, has been suspected in some individuals, but is unproven.
It is not necessary for the KAT6A syndrome’s clinical features to have a strong association with the type or location of the gene variation. However, for core features such as intellectual disability, speech and communication delays, microcephaly, cardiac anomalies and gastrointestinal complications, studies on genotype-phenotype correlations have shown that these core features are more prevalent in late truncating mutations.

