KAT6B-Related Disorders

synonyms:
KAT6B syndrome

overview:
Summary
KAT6B-related disorders are extremely rare genetic neurodevelopmental disorders caused by changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in theKAT6Bgene. Neurodevelopmental disorders impair or alter the growth and development of the brain and the central nervous system. Variants in theKAT6Bgene can lead to a broad spectrum of signs and symptoms, some of which can be grouped into genitopatellar syndrome (GPS) or a type of Ohdo syndrome called Say-Barber-Biesecker-Young-Simpson (SBBYS) but features very frequently overlap. Commonly, these include varying degrees of intellectual disability, delays in reaching developmental milestones (developmental delays), feeding difficulties, diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), abnormalities affecting the heart, hips or knees and growth problems. Less common features include hearing impairment, seizures and autism-like behaviors, and abnormalities of the thyroid gland, skull, genitals, kidneys and teeth. In most instances, variants in theKAT6Bgene occur spontaneously and there is no family history of the disorder (de novovariants). Treatment is based on the specific symptoms present in each individual.

symptoms:
Variants in theKAT6Bgene can lead to a broad spectrum of signs and symptoms. On either side of the spectrum are some clinical features that are associated more often with either genitopatellar syndrome (GPS) or a type of Ohdo syndrome called Say-Barber-Biesecker-Young-Simpson (SBBYS). But individuals affected by KAT6B-related disorders frequently have intermediate clinical features that are a mixture or overlap between these two syndromes. Some individuals have clinical features that do not overlap with either syndrome at all.
The potential symptoms associated with a variation in theKAT6Bgene are numerous and highly variable and can depend on the specific type of variant (e.g., type of mutation, or location in the gene). This is called genotype-phenotype correlation. It is important to note that every child is unique and how the disorder affects one child can be very different from how it affects another.
Neurologic features are present in most individuals affected by KAT6B-related disorders. A child’s progression through predictable developmental phases, like sitting up and crawling, may be slowed, stopped or reversed (developmental delays). Global developmental delays can affect both motor functions, like walking, and intellectual development ranging from mild to severe. Speech delays and language disorders are frequent, though some individuals can communicate through vocalization or manipulating objects. Some brain anomalies are more common in individuals affected by GPS including an absence of the area of the brain which connects the two cerebral hemispheres (agenesis of the corpus callosum) that can contribute to developmental delays and can sometimes cause seizures. Less frequently, an unusual amount of cerebrospinal fluid can increase pressure on the brain and cause damage or seizures. Individuals affected by SBBYS are more likely to have an underdeveloped or damaged optic nerve, and impairments in the region of the brain that processes visual information (cortical visual impairment). These can lead to visual deficiencies in one eye (lazy eye) or nearsightedness.
Most individuals affected by KAT6B-related disorders have feeding difficulties and gastrointestinal features. Feeding challenges can include difficulty coordinating motor functions and swallowing (dysphagia) which can lead to choking or breathing food, liquid or other foreign material into the lungs (aspiration). Most individuals, especially infants, can have a backflow of the contents of the stomach into the esophagus (gastroesophageal reflux). In some individuals, improper development of the intestines may cause them to settle in the wrong parts of the abdomen, which can cause them to become blocked or twisted (small bowel malrotation) and lead to frequent vomiting or constipation. Additionally, individuals with GPS are more likely to have anal abnormalities, including no anus (anal atresia), a narrowing of the anal canal (anal stenosis), or mispositioning of the anus closer to the front of the body. These conditions can lead to serious health complications from a failure to pass stool.
Some individuals affected by KAT6B-related disorders have low muscle tone (hypotonia) and muscle abnormalities. For infants especially this can further complicate feeding and breathing, but often difficulties resolve in infancy. In GPS, infants are more likely to have an abnormality where tissue located above the voice box flops back over the upper-airway (laryngomalacia) and obstructs breathing. Beyond infancy, hypotonia of extremities and the trunk may continue. Nearly all individuals affected with GPS have permanently short and tight muscles (contractures), primarily in the knees and hip, that significantly restrict flexibility and movement. In SBBYS, contractures only occasionally occur.
Skeletal and growth abnormalities can also occur. Affected infants may have a condition in which head circumference is smaller than would otherwise be expected based on age and gender (microcephaly). Rarely, flexible sutures in spaces typically found between bones of a baby’s skull turn into bone and join prematurely (craniosynostosis). This can cause changes in skull growth patterns that often result in a misshapen head. In children, additional growth abnormalities can include varying degrees of poor weight gain, diminished physical growth and below average height. More common in individuals affected by GPS are underdeveloped (hypoplastic), dislocated or absent kneecap (patella), clubfoot, and bone abnormalities of the spine, ribs and pelvis. Individuals affected by SBBYS are more likely to have toe and finger abnormalities, and most individuals will have long thumbs and great toes.
Roughly half of affected individuals have heart defects that are present from birth (congenital heart defects). These can include atrial and ventricular septal defects. Septal defects are when there is a ‘hole’ in the membrane (septum) that separates the two lower chambers of the heart, called the ventricles, or in the membrane that separates the two upper chambers of the heart, called the atria. Additionally, normal openings in the fetal heart may fail to close at birth (patent ductus arteriosus and patent foramen ovale). Incomplete closure of these holes can allow varying amounts of blood to bypass the lungs where they would normally pick up oxygen. The size of these ‘holes will determine whether any symptoms are present, and how severe these symptoms may be.
Distinct facial features associated with KAT6B-related disorders commonly include low-set ears, prominent cheeks, a flat and broad nasal bridge, a longer than usual vertical indentation that extends from the middle area of the upper lip to the nose (philtrum), a thin upper lip and jawbone abnormalities like an abnormally small jaw (micrognathia) or the lower jawbone set further back than expected on the face (retrognathia). More common in individuals affected by GPS are prominent eyes (proptosis), a cone-head shaped head and a nose with either a bulbous end or a broad or prominent base. More common in individuals affected by SBBYS are immobile faces that show less expression (mask-like facies). Eye anomalies are also more frequent and can impact visual function including abnormalities of the ducts that supply tears to keep eyes moist (lacrimal ducts), drooping eyes (ptosis) and underdevelopment of eyelids (blepharophimosis) that prevent the eyelids from fully opening and permanently cover part of the eyes.
An opening at the top of the mouth (cleft palate) is present in about a third of individuals affected by KAT6B-related disorders. A few individuals with a cleft palate also have jawbone abnormalities and tongue displacement (glossoptosis) that form a cluster of features called Pierre Robin sequence. Tongue displacement can cause additional breathing, eating or swallowing difficulties in infants, but typically improves as the infant grows up.
Hearing loss is often present in individuals affected with KAT6B-related disorders. It can be caused by both sound waves incorrectly traveling through the ear (conductive) and damage to the inner ear or hearing nerves (sensorineural).
A minority of individuals with KAT6B-related disorders may have thyroid gland function abnormalities that cause less thyroid hormone to be produced (hypothyroidism). Some individuals may have an underdeveloped (hypoplasia) or absent (agenesis) thyroid gland.
Most individuals affected by KAT6B-related disorders have genital abnormalities. A male baby may be born with a urethra opening not at its usual location at the head of the penis (hypospadias) and may experience a delay or failure of the testes to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism). Females may have an enlarged clitoris and developmental abnormalities of the labia. Males with GPS are more likely to have developmental abnormalities of the scrotum, penis and testes and most females will have a delay in puberty.
Some individuals affected by KAT6B-related disorders can experience behavioral or psychiatric issues that can include anxiety, aggressive behavior, attention problems and features suggestive of autism spectrum disorder.
Kidney (renal) abnormalities occur in many individuals affected by GPS including kidney swelling, multiple cysts and functional anomalies that can rarely lead to kidney failure in infants.
Occasionally, teeth abnormalities may occur in affect individuals with KAT6B-related disorders and can include underdeveloped or absent teeth, a baby being born with teeth (natal teeth), and a child not losing their baby teeth as expected (retained primary dentition). A delay in the eruption of teeth tends to occur more in SBBYS.

