Kawasaki Disease

synonyms:
Kawasaki SyndromeMLNSMucocutaneous Lymph Node Syndrome

overview:
Kawasaki disease is an acute multisystem inflammatory disease of blood vessels (vasculitis) that most commonly affects infants and young children. The disease may be characterized by a high fever, inflammation of the mucous membranes of the mouth and throat, a reddish skin rash, and swelling of lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy). In addition, individuals with Kawasaki disease may develop inflammation of arteries that transport blood to heart muscle (coronary arteritis), associated widening or bulging (aneurysms) of the walls of affected coronary arteries, inflammation of heart muscle (myocarditis), and/or other symptoms and findings. Kawasaki disease is the primary cause of acquired heart disease in children in the United States. Although the cause of the disease is unknown, it is widely thought to be due to infection or an abnormal immune response to infection.

symptoms:
In many affected children, the initial symptom associated with Kawasaki disease is a high fever that typically rises and falls (remittent fever) and lasts for approximately one to two weeks without treatment.  In some cases, fever may persist for up to about three to four weeks.  Additional characteristic features include inflammation of the whites of the eyes (bilateral conjunctivitis); inflammation of mucous membranes of the mouth and throat, resulting in dry, red, cracked lips and a strawberry-red tongue; swelling of lymph nodes in the neck (cervical lymphadenopathy); redness and swelling of the hands and feet; and a reddish rash, typically affecting the trunk and often involving the groin area.  By about the second or third week, skin tissue may peel (desquamate) from the tips of the fingers and toes and may progress to involve the hands and feet.
In many cases, affected children may have additional symptoms and findings, such as irritability, diarrhea, vomiting, coughing, and/or joint inflammation (arthritis), pain, and swelling. Other associated abnormalities may include enlargement of the liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly), inflammation of the protective membranes covering the brain (aseptic meningitis), inflammation of the middle ear (otitis media), and/or other findings.
Many individuals with Kawasaki disease may also have heart (cardiac) involvement.  Up to 50 percent may develop inflammation of heart muscle (myocarditis), which may be associated with an abnormally increased heart rate (tachycardia), decreased ventricular (lower heart chamber) functioning, and, in severe cases, impaired ability of the heart to effectively pump blood to the lungs and the rest of the body (heart failure).  In addition, in some cases, heart involvement may include inflammation of the membranous sac surrounding the heart (pericarditis), leakage of certain heart valves (aortic or mitral valve insufficiency), or other abnormalities.
The most serious cardiac complication is inflammation of arteries that provide oxygen-rich blood to heart muscle (coronary arteritis) and possible weakening, widening (dilation), and bulging (aneurysms) of affected arterial walls.  Dilation and aneurysm formation occur in approximately three to 20 percent of patients.  In severe cases, complications may include the development of blood clots in the ballooned area with obstruction of blood flow, bursting (rupture) of an aneurysm, or heart attack, leading to potentially life-threatening complications.  Some cases have also been reported in which patients, particularly infants, have fever with fewer than four other features of the disease (see “Diagnosis” below) and subsequently develop coronary artery disease.

