KBG Syndrome

synonyms:
short stature, facial/skeletal anomalies-retardation-macrodontia

overview:
KBG syndrome (KBGS) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by large front teeth (macrodontia), characteristic facial features, short to normal stature, developmental delay or intellectual disability (the level of intellectual disability is usually mild, and there are also people with KBGS who have a normal development). Behavioral issues are common. People with KBGS can have skeletal abnormalities (such as short fingers, delayed closure of the fontanelle or scoliosis), hearing loss and feeding difficulties (particularly in infancy), and some have epilepsy (seizures) or brain malformations.  The specific symptoms may vary from one person to another. KBG syndrome is caused by a change (variant or mutation) in theANKRD11gene or a loss of genetic material (microdeletion) on chromosome 16q that involves theANKRD11gene. Variants of this gene can occur spontaneously with no family history or be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. KBG syndrome is named after the initials of the last names of the first three families identified with this disorder in the medical literature in 1975.

symptoms:
Children with KBG syndrome may display characteristic physical abnormalities of the head and face (craniofacial dysmorphism). The shape of the skull can be abnormal, with a flat back of the head (brachycephaly). Characteristic facial features may include eyes that appear widely spaced apart (hypertelorism) or crossed (strabismus); wide, bushy eyebrows; thin, bow-shaped lips; prominent ears; and/or a triangularly shaped face. There is typically a full tip of the nose with upturned nostrils. Characteristic features may also include large teeth (macrodontia). Macrodontia is particularly common in KBG syndrome and often affects the two upper middle teeth (upper central incisors) and sometimes other teeth as well. Affected individuals may also have jagged, crowded or misaligned teeth and/or unusually short, flattened, supporting bones or sockets of the jaw (mandible) that house the teeth (alveolar ridges). Microcephaly has been described in some children. Microcephaly is a condition in which the circumference of the head is smaller than would be otherwise expected based on age and gender. However, most children with KBG syndrome have a normal head size.
A child with KBG syndrome may also have speech and hearing impairments, and/or have mild to moderate levels of intellectual disability. Children with intellectual disability may experience delays in reaching developmental milestones. Most children will only experience mild learning disabilities. Other children will not have intellectual disabilities and have no issues with learning or thinking that are related to KBG syndrome. Part of the adults with KBG syndrome can live independently, but other adults with KBG need external help or live in assisted facilities.
People (especially children) with KBGS may have hearing loss. This can be sensorineural or perceptive and might require treatment such as hearing aids. Children experience recurrent ear infections (otitis media), which may contribute to hearing loss.
Some children have behavioral issues such as impulsivity or poor concentration, sometimes with a diagnosis of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), temper tantrums, anxiety or shyness, or compulsive and sometimes aggressive behavior. Autism spectrum disorder or autistic traits can also be present in children with KBG syndrome. The nature of the behavioral issues is variable.
Some children have epilepsy, usually during childhood. The type of epilepsy can vary from generalized or partial seizures that respond well to therapy, to more complex forms of epilepsy that are difficult to treat. Some children also have EEG abnormalities without signs of seizures. Sometimes MRI scans of the brain show abnormalities.
About 40% of people with KBGS have a short stature. Affected children may have delayed bone age, which means that a child’s bones mature at a slower rate. Other malformations of the bones can be present, such as spinal abnormalities (abnormal vertebrae or ribs); the shortened middle portion of the thigh bones (femoral neck); abnormally developed hip bones (hip dysplasia/Perthes disease); and/or shortened, hollow finger bones (metacarpals). Scoliosis (sideways curve of the spine) is quite common.
In some children, associated features may include a sunken, pushed-in appearance of the chest (pectus excavatum or “funnel chest”); a single deep crease across the palms of the hands (simian crease); certain bones of the hands may be short (short tubular bones of the hands), pinkies that are unusually short (brachydactyly) and/or that may be stuck in a bent position (clinodactyly).
Less commonly, additional findings have been reported in some children including congenital heart defects, defects affecting the roof of the mouth (palate), webbing or fusion (syndactyly) of the middle toes and a webbed, short neck. Some males may have undescended testicles (cryptorchidism). Advanced puberty has been reported in some children. Some infants have sleep difficulties.
Feeding difficulties are present in about 20% of people with KBGS and can include vomiting, constipation and gastroesophageal reflux disease.
Some children with KBGS have been reported to have incomplete closure of certain bones of the spinal column (spina bifida) or inelastic tissue on the caudal spinal cord (tethered cord). People with KBG might have various eye and vision problems such as crossed eyes (strabismus), cloudy lenses of the eyes (congenital cataracts), blurred vision or other vision problems. Some patients have skin or hair differences including dark spots on the skin (hyperpigmentation); dry, itchy skin; excess body hair (hypertrichosis); abnormal hair patterns on the scalp and/or deformed, thickened or discolored nails.
Delayed closure of the ‘soft spots’ or fontanelles has also been reported. An infant’s skull has seven bones and several joints called sutures. Sutures are made of tough, elastic fibrous tissue and separate the bones from one another. Sutures meet up (intersect) at two spots on the skull called fontanelles, which are better known as an infant’s “soft spots”. The seven bones of an infant’s skull normally do not fuse together until around age two or later. The sutures normally remain flexible until this point. In some infants, this fusion is delayed. The fontanelle can also be unusually large at birth.

