KCNB1 Encephalopathy

synonyms:
early infantile epileptic encephalopathy (EIEE26)KCNB1-related epilepsy

overview:
Summary
KCNB1encephalopathy is a rare autosomal dominant genetic disorder caused by a change in theKCNB1gene. Patients have developmental delay starting in infancy or early childhood, often with prominent language impairment. Most children develop multiple types of seizures that can be frequent and hard to control with standard treatments. However, a few patients do not have seizures but may still have abnormal patterns on EEG. Some children may have features of autism or Rett syndrome or have a diagnosis of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. Broadly patients withKCNB1encephalopathy may be classified as having a developmental and epileptic encephalopathy since features of developmental delay and epilepsy are the most common.
Introduction
KCNB1encephalopathy was first identified in 2014 in three patients with severe early onset seizures and developmental delay. Over the last few years, with increasing availability of genetic testing, additional patients have been identified with a broader range of clinical features (see the Signs & Symptoms section for further explanation).

symptoms:
Due to the recent identification of the syndrome and limited number of patients with detailed clinical characterization, the full extent of symptoms has yet to be described. To date, the largest patient cohort was published in 2017 and including 26 patients. All 26 patients had developmental delay with speech/language more affected than other aspects of development. About half of children withKCNB1encephalopathy have features of autism, abnormal behavior, or attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). A little less than half of patients have hypotonia, or low muscle tone that may contribute to delayed motor skills. A few patients have movement disorders or involuntary movements, vision changes (either strabismus or cortical visual impairment), GI issues, and sleep disturbances. Some patients also have borderline long QT and/or autonomic nervous system abnormalities. The QT interval represents the time it takes for the heart ventricles to squeeze and relax. A long QT interval is associated with an increased risk of abnormal heart rhythms and even sudden cardiac death in some cases. The autonomic nervous system is important for regulating unconscious body functions including heart rate, blood pressure, breathing rate, sweating, and digestion. The specific changes to the autonomic nervous system function have not been well described yet.
With regard to epilepsy, the majority of patients withKCNB1encephalopathy also have difficult to control epilepsy with seizure onset usually in late infancy to early childhood. Most patients have multiple seizure types including myoclonic, atonic, generalized tonic-clonic, infantile spasms, tonic, drop attacks, absence, and focal dyscognitive seizures. The initial seizure type may be focal dyscognitive seizures that are subtle and difficult to recognize especially in young children. Up to one quarter of patients, including those without discrete seizures may have an abnormal pattern on EEG during sleep called continuous spike wave during slow-wave sleep (CSWS) or electrical status epilepticus during slow-wave sleep (ESES). This EEG pattern can be seen in patients with other genetic changes and is sometimes associated with developmental regression or expressive language difficulties (see Landau-Kleffner in Related Disorders section).

