KCNK9 Imprinting Syndrome

synonyms:
Birk-Barel syndromeBirk-Barel intellectual disability dysmorphism syndrome

overview:
Summary

KCNK9imprinting syndrome is an extremely rare genetic disorder characterized by a variety of symptoms including distinctive facial features, varying degrees of the intellectual disability, and low muscle tone at birth (hypotonia). The specific symptoms and severity of the disorder can vary from one person to another. Because so few people with this disorder have been reported in the medical literature, researchers do not yet have a complete understanding of the symptoms potentially associated with the disorder. TheKCNK9imprinting syndrome is caused by an alteration in the maternal copy of theKCNK9gene. An alteration in the paternal copy of theKCNK9gene is not believed to be associated with disease.

symptoms:
Although researchers have been able to establish a clear syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about the disorder is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified cases, the lack of large clinical studies, and other factors prevent physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below or may have symptoms that are not discussed. Every case is unique and the disorder can be different in one child when compared to another.
Affected children may have a head that is longer than would be expected (dolichocephaly). As infants and children age, distinctive facial features may become noticeable including an elongated face with a narrow bitemporal diameter, which means that the distance between the two temporal sutures (on the sides of the skull) is more narrow than normal. Additional facial features include full eyebrows that are arched and flared upward, a short groove or depression that runs from the nose to the upper lip (short philtrum), a tented upper lip, abnormalities of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate in 42% of known cases), and a small lower jaw (micrognathia) that is set back or recessed farther than normal (retrognathia) so that the upper and lower jaws don’t meet when the mouth is closed. The bridge of the nose may be narrow and high and the tip of the nose may be broad.
Severe generalized low muscle tone (hypotonia) may be present at birth (congenital). These children may be described as being ‘floppy.’ Infants may have low blood sugar after birth that eventually goes away on its own (transient neonatal hypoglycemia). Some infants experience severe difficulties with feeding because of a poor ability to suck. Children may have difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) liquids, and some children may require the placement of a gastrostomy tube to aid with feeding. They may also have difficulty speaking (dysphonia) and a muffled-sounding voice into early adulthood.
Older children have exhibited intellectual disability that has ranged from moderate to severe, delays in reaching developmental milestones, weakness of the muscles closest to the body (proximal muscles) such as those of the upper legs or upper arms, and reduced facial movements. Muscle weakness and hypotonia may eventually progress to cause contractures, which is when a joint becomes fixed, and this may be alleviated by physical therapy. Some children will develop seizures.

