KCNQ2 Developmental and Epileptic Encephalopathy

synonyms:
KCNQ2EKCNQ2-related neonatal developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (KCNQ2-NEO-DEE)early infantile epileptic encephalopathy (EIEE7)KCNQ2-DEE

overview:
Summary
Children with KCNQ2 developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (KCNQ2-DEE) typically present with seizures in the first week of life. Seizures appear as stiffening of the body (tonic) often associated with jerking and changes in breathing or heart rate. The seizures are usually quite frequent (many per day) and often difficult to treat. Typically, the seizures are associated with abnormal brain wave patterns on EEG during this time. The seizures often resolve within months to years, but children have some degree of developmental impairment involving one or more domains (motor, social, language, cognition). This can range from mild to severe depending on several different factors. Some children may also have autism or other neurobehavioral issues. Other, less common presentations have also been reported including later onset seizures, intellectual disability without seizures, infantile spasms and sudden twitching (myoclonus).
The story of KCNQ2-DEE begins with the identification and characterization of another related disorder, benign familial neonatal seizures (BFNS) now called SLFNE (self-limited familial neonatal epilepsy). This condition was initially described as a syndrome in 1964 by Rett and Teubel. They reported a family with eight affected individuals over 3 generations. The youngest infant had the onset of seizures at three days of age described as tonic-clonic events occurring multiple times per day. The EEG was normal in between seizures and the children developed appropriately after the seizures stopped later in infancy. Over the next twenty years, additional families with similar stories were described. In a few instances, seizures persisted into later life, but outcomes were otherwise favorable. The pattern of inheritance was determined to be autosomal dominant (see the Affected Populations section for further explanation) and genetic testing linked the disorder to the long arm of chromosome 20 (see the Causes section for further definition). In 1998, researchers identified a gene in the region that appeared similar in structure to a potassium channel within the heart. This new gene was named, according to convention, KCNQ2. Subsequently, several families were identified in which the outcome was not benign having either persistent seizures that did not respond to medication, developmental impairment or both. This prompted a group of researchers to screen patients with severe neonatal epilepsy syndromes for changes (variants or mutations) in KCNQ2.  Eight children were identified from the group of 80 patients and the children shared many characteristics. Since that initial paper in 2012, many more individuals have been diagnosed and the syndrome has been defined further. Approximately 200 individuals with KCNQ2-DEE have been reported in the medical literature.

