Kearns Sayre Syndrome

synonyms:
chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia and myopathychronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia with ragged red fibersCPEO with myopathyCPEO with ragged red fibersKSSmitochondrial cytopathyocculocraniosomatic syndrome (obsolete)ophthalmoplegia, pigmentary degeneration of the retina and cardiomyopathyophthalmoplegia plus syndromesingle large-scale mtDNA deletion syndrome (SLSMDS)

overview:
Kearns-Sayre syndrome (KSS) is a rare multisystemic disorder. An important clinical symptomatic feature is the presence of droopy eyelids (ptosis) in one or both eyes. This disease is mostly characterized by three primary findings: progressive paralysis of certain eye muscles (chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia [CPEO]); abnormal accumulation of colored (pigmented) material on the nerve-rich membrane lining the eyes (atypical retinitis pigmentosa), or pigmentary retinopathy, leading to poor night vision and progressive vision loss; and heart disease such as cardiomyopathy and/or progressive arrhythmia leading to complete heart block. Other findings may include muscle weakness, short stature, sensorineural hearing loss, endocrine issues such as diabetes mellitus and hypoparathyroidism (which can cause hypocalcemia) and/or the loss of ability to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia) due to problems affecting part of the brain (cerebellum). In some patients, KSS may be associated with other disorders and/or conditions.
KSS belongs (in part) to a group of rare disorders known as mitochondrial encephalomyopathies. Mitochondrial encephalomyopathies are disorders in which a defect in genetic material (DNA) arises from a part of the cell structure (mitochondria), that produces energy (in the form of adenosine triphosphate, or ATP) causing the brain and muscles to function improperly due to lack of energy (encephalomyopathies). In these disorders, abnormally high numbers of defective mitochondria are present. In approximately 80 percent of affected individuals with KSS, tests will reveal missing genetic material (deletion) involving the unique DNA in mitochondria (mtDNA).

symptoms:
The three primary findings in KSS are progressive paralysis of certain eye muscles including the eyelid (ptosis) leading to chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO), pigmentary retinopathy, and heart disease such as an arrhythmia leading to complete heart block or cardiomyopathy. Symptoms of this disorder are usually apparent before the age of 20 years.
In most patients, the first physical characteristic of this disorder is short stature and/or failure to thrive. In addition, drooping of the upper eyelid (ptosis) due to weakness of one of the muscles of the eyelid (levator palpebrae superioris) is also seen during childhood or adolescence. Other muscles involved in coordinating eye movements may be affected next, growing progressively weaker and eventually resulting in paralysis of certain eye movements (CPEO). Eventually, muscle weakness may extend to other portions of the face, throat (pharynx), neck, and/or shoulders. Muscle weakness in such areas may hinder talking and/or swallowing (dysphagia). As the disease progresses, the upper arms and legs may be affected, resulting in progressive weakness in addition to impairment of coordinated movement and balance disorder (ataxia).
Most individuals with KSS will also have visual difficulties due to the abnormal accumulation of colored (pigmented) material on the delicate membrane that lines the eyes (atypical retinitis pigmentosa) and progressive degeneration of certain portions of the eye (pigmentary degeneration of the retina). This degenerative process may eventually affect the optic nerve (optic atrophy), the layers of membranes behind the retina (choroid), and/or the tough, white outer covering of the eyeball (sclera). Some affected individuals may also experience night blindness; rapid, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus); and a decrease in the sharpness of vision (visual acuity).Rarely, abnormal clouding of the front portion of the eyeball (cornea) may also contribute to nystagmus and decreased visual acuity. About 40 percent of people with KSS experience profound visual problems.
The third primary finding in people with KSS is an interference with the transfer of nerve impulses (conduction) that control the activity of heart muscles (heart block). The severity of such conduction abnormalities may vary among affected individuals.
The normal heart has four chambers. The two upper chambers, known as atria, are separated from each other by a fibrous partition known as the atrial septum. The two lower chambers are known as ventricles and are separated from each other by the ventricular septum. Valves connect the atria (left and right) to their respective ventricles. In the mild form of heart block, the two upper chambers of the heart (atria) beat normally, but the contractions of the two lower chambers (ventricles) slightly lag behind. In the more severe forms, only a half to a quarter of the atrial beats are conducted to the ventricles. In complete heart block, the atria and ventricles beat separately. In some cases, heart block may lead to blackouts (syncope), breathlessness, and/or irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias). Bundle-branch block may be seen on electrocardiogram (EKG) and indicates that the arrhythmia is present; this may progress unpredictable and quickly to complete heart block and a prophylactic pacemaker is indicated to prevent a sudden cardiac event.
Individuals with KSS may also exhibit a variety of other physical characteristics and symptoms. The number and severity of these symptoms may vary greatly from patient to patient; in some people, individuals may exhibit a partial or incomplete form of the disorder. The additional physical characteristics and symptoms associated with KSS may include developmental delays; short stature ; diminished muscle tone (hypotonia); hearing loss, eventually leading to deafness; cognitive impairment; progressive memory loss and deterioration of intellectual abilities (dementia), and/or abnormalities affecting various of parts of the brain (e.g., white and gray matter, brain stem, and/or cerebellum).
In some affected individuals, KSS may also be associated with several disorders involving the function of structures and organs that secrete hormones into the blood system (multiple endocrine dysfunction). The most common of these disorders occurring in association with KSS include hypoparathyroidism, diabetes mellitus, and/or primary failure of the ovaries or testes (gonads). These disorders may result in short stature, a delay in reaching puberty, excessive fatigue, and/or muscle cramps. The relationship between KSS and endocrine abnormalities is not fully understood.
KSS may also be associated with other disorders or conditions including absence of certain reflexes (peripheral neuropathy), and progressive kidney (renal) abnormalities including chronic renal failure. Peripheral neuropathy is a disorder that may affect one or several nerves of the body, causing pain and weakness. Peripheral neuropathy may affect sensory, motor, reflex, or blood vessel function.

