Kennedy Disease

synonyms:
KDKennedy's syndromeSBMAspinal and bulbar muscular atrophyspinal bulbar muscular atrophyX-linked spinal and bulbar muscular atrophyX-linked spinal bulbar muscular atrophyspinobulbar muscular atrophyX-linked spinobulbar muscular atrophy

overview:
Summary
Kennedy disease is a rare, X-linked slowly progressive neuromuscular disorder. Kennedy disease is typically an adult-onset disease, where symptoms present mainly between the ages of 20 and 50. The disease is characterized by symptoms such as muscle weakness and cramps in the arms, legs, and facial area, fasciculations of the tongue / face, enlarged breasts and sometimes difficulty with speaking and swallowing (dysphagia). Kennedy disease affects approximately 1/200,000 people worldwide and mostly occurs in males. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive and life expectancy is normal, though a small percentage of patients (~10%) succumb to the disease in their 60’s or 70’s due to swallowing complications (aspiration pneumonia, asphyxiation) resulting from the bulbar weakness.

Introduction
Kennedy disease is named after William R. Kennedy, MD, who described this condition in an abstract in 1966 and a full report in 1968, although the disease was recognized in Japan previously, where the frequency is much more common.

symptoms:
Affected individuals begin to develop neurological symptoms between 20 to 50 years of age. These early symptoms include:
· Weakness/cramps in arm and leg muscles (proximal > distal)· Face, mouth and tongue muscle weakness· Difficulty with speaking and swallowing (dysphagia)· Twitching (fasciculations)· Tremors and trembling in certain positions· Enlarged breasts (gynecomastia)· Numbness· Reduced fertility· Testicular atrophy
The disease affects the lower motor neurons that are responsible for the movement of many muscles in the legs, arms, mouth and throat. Affected individuals show signs of twitching, often in the tongue, face and/or hand, followed by muscle weakness and problems with facial muscles. These neurons, which connect the spinal cord to the muscles, become defective and die, so the muscles cannot contract. The destruction of these nerves is the main reason for numbness, muscle weakness and inability to control muscle contraction. With lack of normal neuromuscular function, a patient may experience hypertrophied calves in which the calf muscles thicken due to muscle cramps. Some patients may have one side of the body more affected than the other side.
The disease also affects nerves that control the bulbar muscles, which are important for breathing, speaking and swallowing. Androgen insensitivity can also occur, sometimes beginning in adolescence and continuing through adulthood, characterized by enlarged breasts, decreased masculine appearance and infertility. Patients may experience problems such as low sperm count and erectile dysfunction.

