Keratosis Follicularis Spinulosa Decalvans

synonyms:
KFSDkeratosis follicularis spinulosa decalvans cum ophiasi

overview:
Keratosis follicularis spinulosa decalvans (KFSD) is a rare, inherited, skin disorder. KFSD is characterized by hardening of the skin (keratosis) on several parts of the body. Most frequently, the face, neck, and forearms are involved. The thickening of the skin is accompanied by the loss of eyebrows, eyelashes and beard. Baldness (alopecia) usually occurs. People with KFSD may have reduced tolerance to bright light (photophobia), inflammation of the eyelids (blepharitis), and inflammation of the outer membrane of the eyeball and the inner eyelid (conjunctivitis, also known as pink eye). Some have abnormal accumulation of material in the clear outer layer of the eye (corneal dystrophy), which may cause loss of vision or blurred vision. Some may also have poor fingernail formation.
Most affected families with KFSD demonstrate an X-linked recessive inheritance pattern. This form of KFSD is called X-linked keratosis follicularis spinulosa decalvans (KFSDX). KFSDX affects predominately men in the family, while women have much milder symptoms. KFSD in these families is caused by an alternation in theMBTPS2gene. Some studies suggest that an alternation in theSAT1gene causes this form of KFSD as well.

symptoms:
KFSD is a type of ichthyoses, a group of inherited disorders of the skin in which the skin tends to be thick and rough and has a scaly appearance. Hardening of the skin around the hair follicles leads to scarring and baldness. This condition begins in infancy, initially appearing on the face and neck, and then progresses to the chest, back, abdomen, arms and legs. Hair loss of the eyebrows and scalp caused by the scarring become evident in childhood and progress until teenage years.
Allergic reactions (atopy), photophobia, and inflammation of the eye’s cornea (keratitis) may also occur. Some people have itchy and red eyeballs and eyelids. Some people affected with KFSD have corneal dystrophy. The cornea must remain clear to be able to focus incoming light. Therefore, corneal dystrophy may cause blurred vision or loss of vision. Occasionally, the teeth become stained and fingernails are poorly formed.
The word decalvans comes from the Greek for snake and alludes to the whorls and winding streaks characteristic of the pattern of baldness in this disorder. The name is often accompanied by the phrase “cum ophiasi” which simply means baldness.

