Keratolytic Winter Erythema

synonyms:
erythrokeratolysis hiemaliskeratolytic winter erythema ichthyosisOudtshoorn skinwinter erythrokeratolysisKWE

overview:
Summary
Keratolytic winter erythema (KWE) is an extremely rare form of skin shedding that was first described in South Africa but has subsequently been identified in other countries. In such cases, a link to South Africa has NOT been determined. The disorder is characterized by periodic episodes of palmoplantar skin shedding preceded by redness and the appearance of dry superficial blisters. The peel is substantial and may be easily gripped. The peeling is enhanced by exposure to water. Symptoms may improve during pregnancy and with age. The disorder may worsen with cold weather and improve in the summer.
Introduction
KWE was first described in 1977 by Findlay et al. Many of the Afrikaner families seen could trace their family back to a town in the Western Cape Province of South Africa, called Oudtshoorn, hence the name Oudtshoorn skin or Oudtshoorn disease. In a genealogical study, the condition was traced to Francois Renier Duminy (born 1747 in Lorient, France), a ship captain who settled in South Africa in the late 1700s.

symptoms:
KWE is characterized by the cyclical patchy redness and thickening of the skin of the palms and soles, followed by the appearance dry blisters which subsequently peel in an expanding pattern. The shedding skin has a thickish peel. The revealed surface skin appears glazed. These signs first appear during infancy or childhood and the disorder usually improves with age. The condition may be worsened by cold weather or episodes of fever.  Secondary infection may complicate the condition. In some patients, slowly enlarging circular red patches may develop, usually on the extremities. These slowly expand and have a trailing edge of peeling.  Other frequently encountered associated symptoms include itching, excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis or palmoplantar sweating) and a strong unpleasant odor.

