Keratomalacia

overview:
Keratomalacia is an eye (ocular) condition, usually affecting both eyes (bilateral), that results from severe deficiency of vitamin A. That deficiency may be dietary (i.e., intake) or metabolic (i.e., absorption). Vitamin A is essential for normal vision as well as proper bone growth, healthy skin, and protection of the mucous membranes of the digestive, respiratory, and urinary tracts against infection.
Early symptoms may include poor vision at night or in dim light (night blindness) and extreme dryness of the eyes (i.e., xerophthalmia), followed by wrinkling, progressive cloudiness, and increasing softening of the corneas (i.e., keratomalacia). With advancing vitamin A deficiency, dry, “foamy,” silver-gray deposits (Bitot spots) may appear on the delicate membranes covering the whites of the eyes. Without adequate treatment, increasing softening of the corneas may lead to corneal infection, rupture (perforation), and degenerative tissue changes, resulting in blindness. In addition, in some cases, vitamin A deficiency may have additional effects, particularly during infancy and childhood.
In some developing countries, vitamin A deficiency in the diet and associated keratomalacia are a major cause of childhood blindness. In such regions, vitamin A deficiency often occurs as part of nonselective general malnutrition in infants and young children. Although rare in developed countries, vitamin A deficiency and keratomalacia may occur secondary to conditions associated with impaired absorption, storage, or transport of vitamin A, such as celiac disease, ulcerative colitis, cystic fibrosis, liver disease, or intestinal bypass surgery and any condition that affects absorption of fat-soluble vitamins.

symptoms:
Keratomalacia is an eye condition characterized by distinctive ocular changes due to severe vitamin A deficiency.  In some affected individuals, additional effects may result from vitamin A deficiency, the severity of which tends to be inversely related to age.
Initial ocular findings commonly include impaired adjustment of the eyes to vision in the dark or dim light (impaired dark adaptation) and associated night blindness due to retinal* (i.e., rod) dysfunction.   (*The retina is the light sensitive membrane upon which images are focused at the back of the eye.  It contains specialized nerve cells [photoreceptors] that convert light into nerve impulses.  Photoreceptors include “rods” that are sensitive to low-intensity light and thus required for night vision, and “cones” that respond to high-intensity light and colors.  “Dark adaptation” is the normal increase in sensitivity of the rods to detect light available for vision in dark or dimly lit areas.)
Vitamin A deficiency leads to abnormalities in the structure and function of certain cells covering the surface of the eyes (i.e., epithelial cells).  Due to such epithelial changes and inadequate tear production, affected individuals develop extreme dryness of the delicate membranes (i.e., conjunctivae) covering the whites of the eyes and inner lining of the lids (xerosis conjunctivae) and the corneas (xerosis corneae).  (The cornea is the thin-walled, “dome-shaped” transparent region forming the front of the eyeball; it serves as a protective covering and helps to focus or bend [refract] light waves onto the retina at the back of the eye.)  Due to abnormal dryness of the conjunctivae and the corneas (i.e., a condition known as “xerophthalmia”), there is unusual thickening and wrinkling of the conjunctivae, as well as increasing cloudiness, haziness, wrinkling, and softening of the corneas.  In addition, in advanced vitamin A deficiency, foamy, silver-gray, triangular patches (Bitot spots) appear that consist of abnormal deposits of epithelial debris and secretions on the conjunctivae.  Evidence suggests that Bitot spots are most likely to develop in young children with other manifestations of vitamin A deficiency.
Without adequate treatment, increasing softening of all or part of the corneas (keratomalacia) may lead to chronic infection, ulceration, and rupture (perforation) of the corneas and degenerative tissue changes (e.g., corneal protrusion and ocular shrinking [phthisis bulbi]), resulting in blindness.
As noted above, in some affected individuals, vitamin A deficiency may have additional effects.  For example, retardation of mental and physical growth is a common sign in children.  Vitamin A deficiency may also be associated with dryness and scaliness of the skin; decreased levels of the oxygen-carrying component of red blood cells (anemia); abnormal enlargement of the liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly); an increased susceptibility to certain infections (e.g., due to epithelial changes of the digestive, respiratory, and urinary tracts); and/or other findings.  Evidence suggests that children with vitamin A deficiency are particularly susceptible to potential complications associated with measles.

