KIF1A-Related Disorder

synonyms:
KIF1A-associated neurological disorder (KAND)

overview:
Summary
KIF1A-related disorder is a group of genetic disorders caused by one or more variations (pathogenic variants or mutations) in theKIF1Agene. Researchers have determined that different variations of this gene have been associated with different signs and symptoms, progression and severity of disease. Although different variations lead to many of the same signs and symptoms, the specific symptoms that develop, the progression of the symptoms and the overall severity can vary greatly. This is true for people in different families with the same genetic variation and members within the same family with the same variation in theKIF1Agene. The differences are based, in part, on where in the gene the variation occurs and the type of variation that occurs. KIF1A-related disorder can be inherited as an autosomal dominant condition or due to a single new (de novo) variant and, in other families, can be inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. KIF1A-related disorder can best be thought of as a spectrum of disease that can range from mild symptoms to severe and life-threatening. Treatment for these disorders is focused on treatment of symptoms.
IntroductionOriginally, changes in theKIF1Agene were thought to lead to three different disorders: nonsyndromic intellectual disability 9 (MRD9), currently known as NESCAV syndrome,  hereditary sensory neuropathy type IIC (HSNIIC) and hereditary spastic paraplegia 30 (SPG30). Some affected individuals may have symptoms and inheritance patterns that fit neatly into these categories, but others do not.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of KIF1A-related disorder can vary greatly from one person to another depending on the specific variation in the gene that is present, the inheritance pattern and other factors. Much about KIF1A-related disorder is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified patients prevent physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals most likely will not have all of the symptoms discussed below and that every person is unique. Parents and patients should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific situation, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT FORMS OF KIF1A-RELATED DISORDERSSome affected individuals have an autosomal dominant form of the disorder that has been associated with a variety of symptoms. These symptoms include intellectual disability, delays in reaching developmental milestones (developmental delays) and diminished muscle tone (hypotonia). Additional symptoms include exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia) and, as infants or children age, increased muscle tone (hypertonia). Eventually, affected children may develop spastic paraplegia, a condition in which people have difficulty walking due to muscle weakness and muscle tightness (spasticity) in the legs. Spastic paraplegia can become progressively worse, significantly affecting the ability walk and get around.
Spastic paraplegia is classified as “uncomplicated” or “pure” when symptoms are confined to leg weakness and tightness. Spastic paraplegia is classified as “complicated” when leg weakness and tightness (spasticity) are accompanied by other neurologic disturbances. Some individuals eventually develop contractures. A contracture is a condition in which a joint becomes permanently fixed in a bent or straightened position, completely or partially restricting the movement of the affected joint.
Some affected individuals have optic nerve atrophy, which is degeneration of the main nerve that carries nerve impulses from the eyes to the brain. Sometimes, the field of vision can be reduced. Some affected individuals experience progressive deterioration of the nerve cells of cerebellum (cerebellar atrophy) and other parts of the brain, which can cause problem with balance and coordination, seizures, and brain function generally. Peripheral neuropathy is a condition that occurs when nerves that carry messages to and from the brain and spinal cord to the rest of the body are damaged. Those affected may experience tingling, burning, numbness, and stabbing pain in the affected extremities.
Other symptoms that have been reported include poor coordination (ataxia), rapid, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus), crossed eyes (strabismus), drooping of the upper eyelid (ptosis), weakness or paralysis of half of the facial muscles (facial diplegia), clumsiness when trying to use their hands to manipulate or hold objects and tremors that occur when attempting to make deliberate actions (intention tremors). A variety of different seizure types have also been described and seizures during sleep can be a particular problem. Some individuals have abnormal electrical activity in the brain that is not a seizure but is not normal. Some individuals have developed abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis). Some infants have microcephaly, a condition in which the head is smaller than would otherwise be expected based on age and sex. Some infants and children experience backflow or regurgitation of the contents of the stomach into the esophagus (gastroesophageal reflux). Some males have had small testes or penis, or there is failure of the testes to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism).
Genetic variants inKIF1Ahave also been associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE FORMS OF KIF1A-RELATED DISORDERSIndividuals with recessive forms of KIF1A-related disorder may have symptoms that fit neatly into the categories described or may have symptoms that look more like the autosomal dominant form of the condition described above.
HEREDITARY SENSORY NEUROPATHY IICSome individuals with variations in theKIF1Agene develop a form of hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy, specifically type IIC. Hereditary sensory neuropathies are a group of rare neurological disorders characterized by degeneration of the nervous system that frequently progresses to loss of feeling, especially in the hands and feet. Symptoms usually start with inflamed fingers or toes, especially around the nails. Numbness and tingling sensations in the hands and feet may also occur. Eventually, affected individuals lose feeling (sensation) in the hands and feet. This sensory loss is due to abnormal functioning of the sensory nerves that control responses to pain and temperature and may also affect the autonomic nervous system that controls other involuntary or automatic body processes. Chronic infection of the affected areas is common and worsens as ulcers form on the fingers or the soles of the hands and feet. NORD has a separate report on hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type II. For more information, choose the exact disorder name as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.
HEREDITARY SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 30Some individuals with variations in theKIF1Agene develop a form of hereditary spastic paraplegia, specifically hereditary spastic paraplegia type 30, or autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia 30, or SP30. The hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSP) are a large group of inherited neurologic disorders that share the primary symptom of difficulty walking due to muscle weakness and muscle tightness (spasticity) in the legs. There are more than 80 different genetic types of HSP. There may be significant variation in the severity of leg weakness (varying from none to marked), the degree of spasticity (varying from minimal to severe) and the occurrence of other neurologic symptoms between different genetic types of HSP; as well differences in the nature and severity of symptoms between individuals who have exactly the same genetic type of HSP. NORD has a separate report on hereditary spastic paraplegia. For more information, choose “hereditary spastic paraplegia” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.

