Kleefstra Syndrome

synonyms:
9q-syndrome9q34.3 deletion syndromechromosome 9q deletion syndrome

overview:
Summary
Kleefstra syndrome is a rare genetic condition that affects multiple organ systems and has specific developmental and behavioral symptoms. Children with Kleefstra syndrome may have specific facial features including a small head size (microcephaly), a broad forehead, widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), distinctive eyebrows and large tongue (macroglossia). Low muscle tone (hypotonia) along with a large birth weight and childhood obesity are also common. Additionally, heart (cardiac), kidney (renal), genital and brain abnormalities may be seen. Most people with Kleefstra syndrome will have some form of intellectual disability which may occur with autistic-like features, speech delay and the development of extreme apathy and/or lack of movement and communication (catatonia) after puberty. Additional symptoms that can occur include epilepsy (seizures) and/or febrile seizures (seizures in the setting of a fever), hearing loss, stomach (gastrointestinal) issues, respiratory infections and farsightedness (hyperopia). Fewer than 1,000 people have been diagnosed with Kleefstra syndrome in the U.S.

Introduction
Kleefstra syndrome was initially known as “9q subtelomeric deletion syndrome” because it is caused by changes in a specific region of chromosome 9, known as 9q34.3. It was renamed in honor of Dr. Tjitske Kleefstra, a clinical geneticist who was one of the first to describe the syndrome in scientific publications. This renaming occurred in the early 2000s.

symptoms:
Kleefstra syndrome has a wide range of symptoms that include physical, developmental and behavioral characteristics. While some physical features are apparent from birth (congenital), other symptoms, particularly behavioral, often develop during early childhood.
People with Kleefstra syndrome have distinctive facial features including a small head size (microcephaly), flattening of the back of the skull (brachycephaly), broad forehead, arched or connected eyebrows (synophrys), widely spaced (hypertelorism) and up-slanting eyes, nostrils that open to the front instead of downwards (anteverted nares), a flatter appearance of the midface (midface hypoplasia), large tongue (macroglossia), full bottom lip (everted lower vermilion), protruding jaw (prognathism) and thickened outer-ear (thickened helix). As children get older, their facial characteristics become more defined and noticeable.
Low muscle tone (hypotonia) is a common symptom. About half of babies with Kleefstra syndrome are born with a large birth weight and may develop childhood obesity.
Other physical symptoms include heart (cardiac) defects such as a hole in the wall between the heart’s chambers (atrial septal defect and/or ventral septal defect), narrowing of the heart vessels (aortic coarctation and/or pulmonic stenosis) and a malformed heart valve (bicuspid aortic valve). These symptoms have been seen in about half (50%) of people diagnosed with Kleefstra syndrome.
Kidney (renal) issues, including abnormal flow of urine (vesicoureteral reflux), stretching and swelling of the kidney (hydronephrosis), development of fluid-filled pouches (renal cysts) and chronic renal failure (insufficiency) are found in approximately 10%-30% of people with Kleefstra syndrome.
Genital differences, including the failure of the testicles to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism), the opening of the urethra not being located at the tip of the penis (hypospadias) and small penis, are reported in 30% of affected males.
Brain abnormalities can include underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the connection between the left and right side of the brain (corpus callosum) and outer layer of brain (cortex).
Most people with Kleefstra syndrome will have some form of intellectual disability which is typically moderate to severe. Autism spectrum disorder along with expressive speech delay is also common. People with Kleefstra syndrome may develop a lack of interest/difficulty in communicating or moving (catatonia) and extreme apathy after puberty. Psychiatric and sleep problems are also associated with the condition.
Other symptoms include epilepsy (seizures) and/or febrile seizures (seizures in the setting of a fever), hearing loss, stomach (gastrointestinal) issues, respiratory infection and farsightedness (hyperopia).

