Kleine-Levin Syndrome

synonyms:
Familial Hibernation SyndromeKleine-Levin Hibernation SyndromePeriodic Somnolence and Morbid Hunger

overview:
Kleine-Levin syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by the need for excessive amounts of sleep (hypersomnolence), (i.e., up to 20 hours a day); excessive food intake (compulsive hyperphagia); and behavioral changes such as an abnormally uninhibited sexual drive. The disorder primarily affects adolescent males. When awake, affected individuals may exhibit irritability, lack of energy (lethargy), and/or lack of emotions (apathy). They may also appear confused (disoriented) and experience hallucinations. Symptoms of Kleine-Levin syndrome are cyclical. An affected individual may go for weeks or months without experiencing symptoms. When present, symptoms may persist for days to weeks. In some cases, the symptoms associated with Kleine-Levin syndrome eventually disappear with advancing age. However, episodes may recur later during life.
The exact cause of Kleine-Levin syndrome is not known. However, researchers believe that in some cases, hereditary factors may cause some individuals to have a genetic predisposition to developing the disorder. It is thought that symptoms of Kleine-Levin syndrome may be related to malfunction of the portion of the brain that helps to regulate functions such as sleep, appetite, and body temperature (hypothalamus). Some researchers speculate that Kleine-Levin syndrome may be an autoimmune disorder.

symptoms:
Kleine-Levin syndrome is an extremely rare disorder characterized by the need for excessive amounts of sleep (hypersomnolence), excessive eating (compulsive hyperphagia), and behavioral abnormalities.
Onset of symptoms associated with this disorder is extremely rapid. Such symptoms may persist for days to weeks. Affected individuals may have approximately two to 12 episodes per year. In most cases, no symptoms of Kleine-Levin syndrome are exhibited between episodes. Episodes become less frequent with age and may eventually disappear (spontaneous remission). However, episodes have been reported to occur in individuals well into the fourth and fifth decades of life.
Individuals with Kleine-Levin syndrome may sleep for 18 to 20 hours per day and wake only to eat, urinate, and defecate. Although affected individuals can be awakened, they may be irritable or listless (lethargic) and/or lack emotion (apathy). They may also appear confused (disoriented), or have difficulties speaking such as slurred speech. In some cases, affected individuals may experience hallucinations or sense of distorted reality in which they feel detached from their surroundings or have disconnected thinking.
In addition, individuals with Kleine-Levin syndrome may have an uncontrollable urge to eat excessively (compulsive hyperphagia). Affected individuals generally do not complain of being excessively hungry but will typically consume available food, regardless of the food’s condition, quality, or appeal to their preferences. Most individuals with Kleine-Levin syndrome may experience weight gain associated with episodes of compulsive hyperphagia.
In some cases, individuals with Kleine-Levin syndrome also exhibit an abnormal sexual drive. They may be sexually uninhibited or have an abnormally increased sex drive (hypersexuality). In addition, in some cases, episodes of Kleine-Levin syndrome may be characterized by other behavioral abnormalities such as memory problems, inattentiveness, absentmindedness, and/or difficulties with concentration. Some affected individuals may show signs of depression, aggression, and/or anxiety. (For more information on Depression, see the Related Disorders section of this report.)

