Kniest Dysplasia

synonyms:
Kniest chondrodystrophyKniest SyndromeMetatropic dwarfism, type IIMetatropic dysplasia, type IISwiss Cheese Cartilage Syndrome

overview:
Kniest dysplasia is one of several forms of dwarfism that is caused by a change (mutation) in a gene known as COL2A1. This gene is involved in the production of a particular protein that forms type 2 collagen, which is essential for the normal development of bones and other connective tissue. Changes in the composition of type 2 collagen lead to abnormal skeletal growth and, thus, to a variety of dwarfing conditions known as skeletal dysplasias.
Some of the signs and symptoms of Kniest dysplasia, such as short stature, enlarged knees, and cleft palate, are usually present at birth. Other characteristics may not appear for two or three years.

symptoms:
People with Kniest dysplasia are known to have an unusually short stature; short, deformed arms and legs; a chest that is “barrel-shaped” and abnormally short; and a relatively long trunk.  Later in life, short trunk dwarfism develops due to curvature of the spine and enlargement of the joints.
People with Kniest dysplasia have an unusually flat face with protruding eyes, and a low nasal bridge.  A cleft palate may also be present, and speech impairment may occur.  Involvement of the eyes may include nearsightedness (myopia) that can progress to retinal detachment and cataracts.  Dislocated eye lenses, drooping of the eyelids (blepharoptosis), possible blindness with disease of the optic nerve, involvement of the spine or brain, and glaucoma may also occur.  As the person matures, the joints may become enlarged causing limited movement and pain.  Limbs are short, often bowed, and there may be irregularities of the ends of the long bones (epiphyses).  Contracted hips may cause walking difficulties and there may be a congenital flattening of the vertebrae and a hump of the spine.  Affected individuals may sometimes exhibit hernias of the groin (inguinal) and navel (umbilical), frequent ear infections, slowed motor development and hearing loss.
Also characteristic of Kniest dysplasia are holes in the individual’s cartilage, creating a “Swiss-cheese” appearance in cartilage that is significant for diagnostic purposes.
One variant of Kniest dysplasia that is extremely rare is known as Kniest-like dysplasia with pursed lips and ectopia lentis or Burton disease.  It is characterized by a small mouth (microstomia) and pursed lips.  In this variant, the collagen does not have the holes mentioned above.

