Koolen-de Vries Syndrome

synonyms:
17q21. 31 microdeletion syndromeKdVS

overview:
Koolen-de Vries syndrome (KdVS) is a rare genetic disorder with an estimated prevalence of about 1 in 30,000 people. Frequent features in individuals with this condition include feeding problems in infancy, muscle weakness (hypotonia) in young children, developmental problems, language/speech delay, learning disabilities and mild to moderate intellectual disability, epilepsy (in about 1 in 3 persons), characteristic facial features, farsightedness, hearing impairment, flexible joints, flat feet and curvature of the spine and/or congenital abnormalities.
Affected children and adults are often sociable and friendly, but behavior problems such as hyperactivity and compulsive behavior may also be present. Some children with KdVS have birth defects. In a significant portion of boys for instance, the testes have not descended (cryptorchidism). Hip dysplasia is more common as well and some of the children have congenital heart defects (particularly atrial septal defect and ventricular septal defect), abnormalities of the bladder and urinary tract and/or brain. Koolen-de Vries syndrome is caused by deletion or change (pathogenic variant) in theKANSL1gene.

Introduction

The 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome was discovered in 2006 by three independent research groups. In 2012, it was established that KANSL1 was the causative gene for KdVS. The syndrome is named after Dutch geneticists David A. Koolen and Bert B. A. de Vries, who helped discover the syndrome in 2006 and theKANSL1gene in 2012.

symptoms:
KdVS is associated with a broad spectrum of symptoms that vary greatly from person to person. Some individuals are more affected than others and an individual with KdVS will not have all the symptoms mentioned in this section. For instance, most will learn to speak at a later age, while some may not speak at all.
Symptoms like developmental delay and/or intellectual disability are very common and present in almost all of individuals with KdVS. This includes speech and language delay which is present in almost all individuals. Children with KdVS usually do learn to speak, but at a significantly later age. The first words occur between ages 2.5 and 3.5 years on average. Sign language or communication devices can help promote communication development and communication in general. Usually however, speech development improves significantly around age 8 to 12 years. Stuttering has been described in some individuals, but not in most. In most individuals, behavior is described as friendly, amiable and cooperative. However, behavior problems, including attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and autism have been reported.
Low muscle tone and specific facial features that can be recognized by a medical expert are very common as well. The nose can have a high nasal bridge, broad nasal root, long columella and underdeveloped and/or thick alae nasi. The facial characteristics change with age. In infancy the facial gestalt is mostly characterized by low muscle tone with an open mouth appearance. With increasing age there is usually elongation of the face and broadening of the chin and the “tubular” or “pear” shape form of the nose may become more apparent.
Low muscle tone can be evident from a very young age, along with poor sucking and feeding problems. Some newborns may require hospitalization and/or tube feeding. When they get older, many children with KdVS have problems chewing lumpy or solid textures.
Epilepsy is a relatively common symptom in individuals with KdVS, affecting about a third of individuals. Seizures usually start in childhood, presenting with a typical pattern when measuring brain activity. The seizures are sometimes related to structural abnormalities of the brain, but not always and generally respond well to anti-epileptic drugs.
Other common symptoms include visual problems including far-sightedness, strabismus or cataracts. Congenital abnormalities in the heart or kidney may also be present. These include, but are not limited to, a heart abnormality in which there is a hole in the wall that separates the lower or upper chambers or a widened aorta (the main and largest artery in the human body). During puberty and thereafter, some individuals develop a curved spine (scoliosis) that requires treatment.
Finally, there is a wide range of symptoms described more frequently in individuals with KdVS than in healthy individuals but are not very common. These include dental anomalies, a slender build, fair hair and multiple birthmarks.

