Kufor Rakeb Syndrome

synonyms:
KRSKufor Rakeb diseaseautosomal recessive, juvenile onset Parkinson’s disease 9Parkinson’s disease 9pallidopyramidal degeneration with supranuclear upgaze paresis and dementia

overview:
Summary

Kufor Rakeb syndrome (KRS), also known as Parkinson’s disease 9, is a very rare form of inherited juvenile-onset Parkinson’s disease. Typical (idiopathic) Parkinson’s disease usually affects people aged 60 or over, but individuals affected by KRS will usually start to develop symptoms before 20 years of age. Depending on the individual, symptoms can include typical Parkinson’s disease symptoms (parkinsonism), such as slowed movements (bradykinesia), rigidity, and tremor, as well as other symptoms that are not typically associated with Parkinson’s disease, including partial or complete paralysis of the legs (paraplegia), inability to move the eyes upward (supranuclear upgaze palsy), and loss of coordination of movements (ataxia). Affected individuals also have brain atrophy (cerebral atrophy) and sometimes have an accumulation of iron in a region of the brain known as the basal ganglia. For this reason, Kufor Rakeb syndrome is part of a group of diseases called neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA).
People living with Kufor Rakeb syndrome also experience symptoms that don’t affect movement (non-motor symptoms), including anxiety, learning difficulties, visual and auditory hallucinations, and dementia.
Treatment of Kufor Rakeb syndrome is similar to treatment of typical Parkinson’s disease and is mainly composed of a combination of two medications called levodopa (L-DOPA) and carbidopa. Other medications, such as dopamine agonists, can also be prescribed. Medication is only used to control the symptoms of the disease (symptomatic treatment), not to cure it. Benefits of medication are mostly for motor symptoms, and have no significant effect on non-motor symptoms of KRS.

Introduction

Kufor Rakeb syndrome was first identified in 1994 in five individuals from a large family living in a Jordanian town called Kufr Rakeb, hence the name of the disease. The gene that is altered in KRS was identified in 2006. Since that time, early detection of the disease and screening of family members is possible with genetic testing. A timely and accurate diagnosis is crucial for patients, as their symptoms can be managed with medication.

symptoms:
For most individuals, symptoms will begin to appear between 10 and 20 years of age. KRS is a neurodegenerative disorder, so the severity of symptoms tends to progress with time. Symptoms varies depending on the individual and can be divided in two major categories: symptoms that affect movement (motor symptoms) and those that do not (non-motor symptoms).
Motor SymptomsMotor symptoms can be further subdivided into typical Parkinson’s disease symptoms (parkinsonism) and symptoms that are not typically associated with Parkinson’s disease. The four main features of parkinsonism are slowed movements (bradykinesia), tremor, rigidity, and postural instability. Other symptoms present in KRS include partial or total paralysis of the legs (paraplegia), inability to move the eyes upward (supranuclear upgaze palsy), loss of coordination of movements (ataxia), muscle stiffness (spasticity), involuntary muscle contractions resulting in abnormal postures (dystonia), involuntary movements (dyskinesia), and increased reflexes (hyperreflexia). This can lead to imbalance and falls in affected individuals. A feature typical of KRS is small, involuntary muscle contractions of the fingers, face, and passage at the back of the mouth leading to the pharynx (facial-faucial-finger mini-myoclonus). Patients can also have difficulty articulating (dysarthria) or swallowing (dysphagia).
Non-Motor SymptomsIntellectual disability and learning difficulties can be the first symptoms to appear, and are among the most common non-motor symptoms. A large proportion of patients will also develop dementia. Other non-motor symptoms include severe anxiety, reduced or absent smell (hyposmia or anosmia), panic attacks, as well as visual and auditory hallucinations. Non-motor symptoms usually greatly impact the quality of life of affected individuals.

