Laband Syndrome

synonyms:
Gingival Fibromatosis, Abnormal Fingers, Nails, Nose, Ear, SplenomegalyZimmermann-Laband SyndromeZLS

overview:
Laband syndrome, also known as Zimmerman-Laband syndrome, is an extremely rare genetic disorder characterized by abnormalities of the head and facial (craniofacial) area and the hands and feet. Most children with this disorder have abnormally large gums (gingival fibromatosis). Overgrown gums may affect the ability to chew, swallow, and/or speak. In addition, affected infants may exhibit abnormally long, thin fingers and toes and/or deformed (dysplastic) or absent nails at birth. In some cases, mental retardation may also be present. In most cases, Laband syndrome is believed to be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. However, evidence of autosomal recessive inheritance has also been reported.

symptoms:
Laband syndrome is an extremely rare genetic disorder characterized by abnormalities of the head and face (craniofacial) area and the fingers and toes, particularly the thumbs and great toes. Abnormalities affecting the fingers and toes may be apparent at birth (congenital); other symptoms may not become apparent until later during childhood. The range and severity of symptoms vary from case to case.
Most children with Laband syndrome develop abnormally large gums (gingival fibromatosis). Overgrowth (hypertrophy) of the gums may cause delayed eruption of teeth. Complications resulting from gingival fibromatosis may include teeth that do not meet properly (malocclusion), chewing (mastication) problems, excessive drooling (salivation), difficulty swallowing, the development of sores at the corners of the mouth, repeated gum infections, abnormal dryness of the mouth (xerostomia), premature loss (exfoliation) of teeth, and/or speech problems. In some cases, as affected children age, the gums may completely cover the teeth and protrude from the mouth.
Individuals with Laband syndrome may also exhibit facial abnormalities that may become apparent during early childhood and progress throughout adolescence. These may include an abnormally narrow facial appearance and/or overgrowth of the tongue, lips, nose, and/or ears. The nose may appear rounded or large (bulbous). The cartilage of the ears and nose may also be abnormally soft. In addition, some children with this disorder may exhibit excessive hair growth (hypertrichosis).
In most cases, individuals with Laband syndrome also have malformations of the hands and feet including abnormally long, slender fingers and toes (arachnodactyly) that may be large and swollen at the tips (distal phalanges). In some cases, the bones of the fingertips may be malformed and/or the joints of the fingers and hands (metacarpophalangeal joints) may be unusually flexible (hyperextensive). In addition, the nails of the hands and feet, particularly the thumbs and great toes, may be malformed (dysplastic) or absent.
In some cases, individuals with Laband syndrome may exhibit other physical characteristics including additional skeletal abnormalities, spinal abnormalities, and an unusually large liver (hepatomegaly) or, less commonly, spleen (splenomegaly). Normal intelligence occurs in some cases; mental retardation ranging from mild to severe has been reported in others.

