LADD syndrome

synonyms:
lacrimo-auriculo-dento-digital syndromeLevy-Hollister syndrome

overview:
Lacrimo-auriculo-dento-digital (LADD) syndrome is an extremely rare genetic disorder characterized by abnormalities affecting the lacrimal and salivary glands and ducts, ears, teeth and fingers and toes. The most common findings involve malformations in the network of structures of the eye that secrete tears and drain them from the eyes (lacrimal apparatus) and abnormalities of the forearms and fingers. Specific symptoms may vary greatly from person to person. LADD syndrome may occur sporadically or be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.

symptoms:
The symptoms of LADD syndrome may greatly vary from person to person. Abnormalities may potentially affect multiple organ systems of the body including the eyes, ears, teeth and limbs.
Malformations in the network of structures of the eye that secrete tears and drain them from the eyes are often found with LADD syndrome. These malformations may include an underdeveloped (hypoplastic) or missing (aplastic) opening in the edge of each eyelid that is linked to the tear duct (lacrimal puncta) and/or an obstruction of the channel that carries tears from the tear sac to the nasal opening (nasolacrimal duct). Absence of the lacrimal puncta is associated with excessive tearing (epiphora), inflammation of the tear sac (dacryocystitis) and keratoconjuntivitis, a condition marked by dryness and inflammation of the cornea and the membrane lining the eyes (conjunctiva). In some people, underdevelopment or absence of the tear sacs may occur resulting in an absence of tears (alacrima) and dry eyes (xerophthalmia). Less often, an abnormal passage (fistula) from the tear sac to the nasal opening may develop.
Underdevelopment or absence of the salivary glands including the parotid and submandibular glands may occur. The parotid glands are located in front and below the ears and secrete saliva into the mouth. The submandibular glands are located underneath the tongue and also secrete saliva into the mouth. Salivary gland abnormalities may result in dry mouth (xerostomia) and a susceptibility to severe tooth cavities (caries). Affected individuals may also have small, underdeveloped (hypoplastic) teeth with thin enamel, peg-shaped incisors and delayed eruption of primary teeth.
Individuals with LADD syndrome may have cup-shaped, low-set ears. Hearing loss, which has ranged from mild to severe, has also been reported. Hearing loss may be due to blockage of sound waves (conductive), nerve impairment (sensorineural) or both (mixed).
Abnormalities affecting the forearms and hands occur in most individuals with LADD syndrome. The tip of the thumb may be clefted or split in two (bifid thumb) and three bones (phalanges) may be found in the thumb instead of two (triphalangeal thumb). In some affected individuals, the thumb may be underdeveloped or absent. Additional abnormalities may occur including shortening of the forearm bones (radius and ulna), webbing of the index and middle fingers and abnormal curving of the pinky toward the ring finger (clinodactyly). Toe abnormalities have also been reported in some people.
Additional findings have been reported in some individuals with LADD syndrome including widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), abnormally increased distance between the inner corners of the eyes (telecanthus), downward slanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures) and a broad forehead. Split-hand deformity has been reported in some people. Abnormalities of the genitourinary system may also occur including an abnormal location of the urethral opening on the underside of the penis (hypospadias), hardening of the kidneys (neprhosclerosis), abnormal accumulation of urine in the kidneys (hydronephrosis) or absence (agenesis) of a kidney.
More recently, moderate to severe lung disease has been reported in individuals with changes (variants) in theFGF10gene.

