Lafora Disease

synonyms:
epilepsy progressive myoclonic 2Lafora body disordermyoclonic epilepsy of LaforaLafora body diseaseLafora progressive myoclonic epilepsyprogressive myoclonic epilepsy type 2progressive myoclonus epilepsy, Lafora type

overview:
Summary
Lafora disease is a rare neurological condition. Early symptoms include neurological issues beginning during adolescence from 8-19 years of age. These issues can include trouble in school, frequent headaches and seizures. Lafora disease occurs when the body does not properly process glycogen, which is a source of stored energy. When glycogen is not processed properly, it builds up in the body and forms clumps called “Lafora bodies” that interfere with proper function of the brain and other physical systems.
Lafora disease is an autosomal recessive genetic condition caused by changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in the genesEPM2AorEPM2B(also calledNHLRC1).

Introduction
Progressive myoclonic epilepsies are a group of rare neurological conditions characterized by myoclonus, generalized epilepsy and neurological decline or neurodegeneration. Myoclonus is a rapid movement of a muscle or group of muscles that appears like a twitch or jerk. Some forms of myoclonus have brain electrical changes on testing called an electroencephalogram (EEG) that makes them similar to a brief seizure. Lafora disease is classified as a progressive myoclonic epilepsy condition.  Lafora disease was first described in 1911 by Gonzalo Lafora.

symptoms:
Lafora disease is characterized by an onset of symptoms between 8-19 years of age, with the peak symptom onset being between 14-16 years. There are also extremely rare cases of early onset Lafora disease in patients as young as 5 years. Most affected individuals do not have symptoms until adolescence and then may start to have headaches, trouble learning in school and, most characteristically, seizures. The most common type of seizure in Lafora disease is myoclonic seizures, which look like jerking or brief shaking movements. Other seizure types include tonic-clonic seizures (stiffening of muscles followed by jerking or shaking), absence seizures (“staring spells”), atonic seizures (the body becomes limp), and complex partial seizures (“staring spells” with jerking or repetitive movements in one part of the body). Focal occipital seizures that present as blindness or hallucinations are possible. Over time, seizures typically increase in severity and become more difficult to control. Status epilepticus (prolonged or back-to-back seizures) may occur.
Motor and movement symptoms can include difficulty with balance, walking, coordination and spasticity. Cognitive and psychiatric features can include difficulty speaking, behavioral changes, depression, apathy and progressive dementia.
Progression of Lafora disease leads to intractable myoclonus, loss of physical functions and severe cognitive decline. Within 6 years of disease onset, around half of individuals affected by Lafora disease will lose the ability to voluntarily move their body and/or cognitively interact with their surroundings. Despite this, 50% of affected individuals survive more than 11 years after presentation of first symptoms. Some affected children have shown a later onset, slower progression of symptoms and live longer than what is typical for most patients with Lafora disease.

