Large Granular Lymphocyte Leukemia

synonyms:
LGLLlarge granular lymphocytic leukemiaLGL leukemia

overview:
Summary
Large granular lymphocyte leukemia (LGLL) is a chronic blood disorder in which there is an increased number of large granular lymphocytes in the peripheral blood that accumulate over time. All cells in the body, including skin cells, liver cells and even immune cells, are meant to die off and be replaced by new cells throughout a person’s lifetime, but in patients with LGLL, large granular lymphocytes do not die off when they are supposed to. In general, LGLL is a disease that progresses very slowly, but these slow changes can lead to frequent infection, anemia and easy bleeding.
Introduction
Usually, when someone has a viral infection like the flu, foreign antigens, such as viral proteins, are recognized by a specific type of white blood cell (usually a T-cell) and cause it to be activated to make many copies of itself (other T-cells) to battle the virus. These cells release toxic molecules to kill cells infected with the virus along with inflammatory signals called cytokines which tell the body that the virus has invaded. The body responds by prioritizing functions that fight the flu such as having the body make lymphocytes rather than other cell types like red blood cells, neutrophils or platelets. When these T-cells successfully fight off the virus, they die off to make room for other blood cells. Their death stops the release of the inflammatory signals, and the body goes back to its healthy, resting state. In people with LGL leukemia, these T-cells do not to die off, so the inflammatory signals keep being released, even when there is no longer a viral infection. The leukemic blood cells accumulate and there is less room for healthy cells. The leukemic cells also release inflammatory signals that tell the body to produce fewer red blood cells, platelets and neutrophils.
LGL leukemia was first reported by Dr. Thomas Loughran in 1985 and described in the publication “Leukemia of Large Granular Lymphocytes: Association with Clonal Chromosomal Abnormalities and Autoimmune Neutropenia, Thrombocytopenia and Hemolytic Anemia” (Loughran et al, 1985). He described a disease characterized by neutropenia (low neutrophils), anemia (low red blood cells) and thrombocytopenia (low platelets). Neutrophils are cells that try to kill any foreign substances in the body before they can cause infection. Red blood cells transport oxygen to organs and tissues. Platelets cause blood to clot and stop bleeding when injury occurs. Patients with low neutrophils may experience recurrent infections. Patients with low red blood cells may experience shortness of breath and fatigue. Patients with low platelets may have trouble getting bleeding to stop when they are injured.

symptoms:
The symptoms that patients with LGL leukemia most commonly experience are related to the changes in neutrophils, red blood cells and platelets. Changes in neutrophils are the most common, followed by changes in red blood cells, with changes in platelets being the least common. Patients can also have a combination of these changes. Many patients with LGL leukemia report fatigue and flu-like symptoms or other symptoms that are commonly associated with having an active infection, even when they do not have an infection (Lamy & Loughran, 2003). As discussed above, the LGL cells that do not die off continue to make the same inflammatory signals that they would during an active infection, so these additional symptoms are likely due to the body continuing to respond to those signals.
Patients with LGL leukemia have a higher-than-normal chance of having autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis. Other autoimmune issues such as Sjogren syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus and Hashimoto’s disease are also associated with LGL leukemia (Sokol & Loughran, 2006; Zhang et al. 2010). Swelling of the spleen and, rarely, the liver occurs in a small number of patients.  Pure red cell aplasia has also been noted in a subset of patients.
Studies have shown a life expectancy of 10 years after diagnosis (Shah et al, 2016).  Although this data was accurate in the population at the time, it is not fully representative of current survival expectations. This information was collected on patients whose disease progression was quite advanced and who were generally older than the current average LGLL patient. It is now possible to diagnosis LGL leukemia earlier in the disease process, and a recent small scale study (Rivero et al. 2021) along with more extensive unpublished data from a patient Registry indicates that patients have an average and mean lifespan that is within a few years of the national average.

