Larsen Syndrome

overview:
Summary

Larsen syndrome is a rare genetic disorder that has been associated with a wide variety of different symptoms. Characteristic findings of the disorder include dislocations of the large joints, skeletal malformations, and distinctive facial and limb features. Additional findings may include abnormal curvature of the spine, clubfoot, short stature, and breathing (respiratory) difficulties. The classic form of Larsen syndrome is caused by mutations of theFLNBgene with a frequency of 1 in 100,000. The mutation may occur spontaneously or be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. IntroductionFLNB-related disorders are a group of disorders (including autosomal dominant Larsen syndrome) that occur due to mutations of the Filamin B gene (FLNB) gene. This group includes atelosteogenesis types I and III, boomerang dysplasia and spondylocarpotarsal syndrome. These disorders are characterized by skeletal abnormalities affecting the bones of the hands and feet, the bones of the spine (vertebrae), joint dislocations, and distinctive facial features. The specific symptoms and severity of these disorders may vary greatly even among members of the same family. Researchers have identified individuals with multiple joint dislocations and skeletal anomalies whose condition appears to be inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. These individuals often have different radiological findings than those with classic Larsen syndrome. Mutations in the carbohydrate sulfotransferase 3 (CHST3) gene have been identified in patients with so-called autosomal recessive Larsen syndrome that also includes humero-spinal dysostosis and spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia Omani type. A variant of Larsen syndrome was reported in patients from Reunion Island in the southern Indian Ocean and characterized by dwarfism, hyperlaxity, multiple dislocations and distinctive facial features. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion and results from a founder homozygous missense mutation inB4GALT7. Mutations in the linkeropathy genes (XYLT1, XYLT2, B4GALT7, B3GALT6,andB3GAT3) can be associated with ocular findings, including blue sclerae, refractive errors, corneal clouding, strabismus, nystagmus, cataracts, glaucoma, and retinal abnormalities, including retinal detachment. A consanguineous Saudi family with severe and recurrent large joint dislocation and severe myopia, was identified with a homozygous truncating variant inGZF1. These ocular findings are not seen inFLNB-related disorders. Since these disorders are known to be caused by different genes than classic, autosomal dominant Larsen syndrome, the term autosomal recessive Larsen syndrome should probably be avoided to prevent confusion with clinical disorders resulting from mutations inFLNB.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of Larsen syndrome vary greatly, including between individuals belonging to the same family. In one large family whose members had Larsen syndrome caused by one of the recurring mutations, some affected individuals have cleft palate and multiple large joint dislocations, but others have no major anomalies and manifested only short stature and mild features, such as short distal phalanges (toe and fingertip bones) and extra bones in the wrist and ankle Mild short stature is common with height below the tenth percentile in 70% of the cases.
Skeletal and joint abnormalities with distinctive facial features are the most common findings associated with the classic, autosomal dominant Larsen syndrome. Some symptoms associated with Larsen syndrome are present at birth, such as dislocation of large joints (80% hip, 80% knee, and 65% elbow) with subluxation of the shoulders the only large joint manifestation in one mildly affected person. Clubfoot is present in about 75% of affected individuals. In addition, the joints of individuals with Larsen syndrome may be extremely lax or loose (hypermobility), which may make them more prone to dislocation. The fingers, especially the thumbs, may be short and broad with squared or rounded tips. Extra bones may be present in the wrists and ankles (supernumerary carpal and tarsal bones), and some of these bones may fuse together during childhood. Retrognathia, patellar dislocation, kyphoscoliosis and dural ectasia also occurs.
Spine abnormalities occur in 84% of individuals with Larsen syndrome including abnormal sideways curvature of the spine (scoliosis) or front-to-back curvature of the spinal bones (vertebrae) in the neck (cervical kyphosis). Cervical kyphosis occurs in 50% of affected individuals, usually from subluxation or fusion of the cervical vertebral bodies, which is usually associated with posterior vertebral arch dysraphism (i.e., dysplasia of the vertebral laminae and hypoplasia of the lateral processes of all cervical vertebrae). Individuals with Larsen syndrome and cervical spine dysplasia are at significant risk for cervical cord damage and secondary paralysis, which occurs in at least 15% of patients.
Individuals with Larsen also have distinctive facial features, which include eyes that are wider apart than normal (hypertelorism), prominent forehead, and depressed bridge of the nose. The middle portion of the face may appear flattened. Incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate) or a cleft in the soft tissue that hangs down in the back of the throat (bifid uvula) may also occur in 15% of affected individuals. Deafness is common, usually preceded by ringing in the ears (tinnitus), and conductive deafness may be associated with malformations of the middle ear ossicles in 21% of individuals.
A few individuals with classic Larsen syndrome have developed abnormal softening of the cartilage of the windpipe (trachea), a condition known as tracheomalacia, but more severe conditions associated withFLNBmutations, such as atelosteogenesis, can have severe laryngotrachiomalacia.
Many individuals have been described in the medical literature with a more severe form of Larsen syndrome. Such individuals have developed additional findings to those discussed above including learning disabilities, developmental delay, life-threatening respiratory (breathing) abnormalities, and heart defects. These conditions are now known to result from different mutations in theFLNBgene and are discussed further in the Related Disorders section of this report.

