Laryngeal Dystonia

synonyms:
LDSDspasmodic dysphoniaspastic dysphonia

overview:
Summary
Laryngeal dystonia (LD) is a chronic voice disorder characterized by spasms of the muscles of the voice box (larynx). These muscles control the voice. The spasms can result in tightness in the throat, recurrent hoarseness, and changes in voice quality and/or difficulty speaking. The most frequent sign of this disorder is a sudden, momentary lapse or interruption of the voice. When affected individuals speak, their voice may sound strained, forced, strangled, breathy, or whispery. Speaking becomes less natural, and often requires great effort.  In severe cases, an affected individual may be barely able to speak. LD can potentially cause significant quality of life issues for affected individuals impacting both work and social situations. There is no cure for LD, but the disorder can be treated. In most cases, the cause of LD is not known.
Introduction
LD is a form of dystonia, a group of movement disorders that vary in their symptoms, causes, progression, and treatments. This group of conditions is generally characterized by involuntary muscle contractions that cause abnormal movements and positions (postures). LD is classified as a focal dystonia because it affects a specific part of the body (muscles of the voice box). The most common type of LD is spasmodic dysphonia (SD).

symptoms:
The severity of LD can fluctuate from symptom-free periods with normal voice to severely disabling periods where an affected individual will experience significant difficulty speaking clearly or be barely able to speak. Symptom fluctuation can occur during the same day or from day to day or longer. LD tends to affect normal conversational speech. Several studies have shown that singing, laughing, and yelling, are often unaffected.
The two most common types of LD are adductor SD and abductor SD. Adductor SD, the more common type, affects approximately 80% to 90% of individuals. This type affects the muscles that draw the vocal cords together. Adductor SD is characterized by a tight, strained, or harsh sounding voice. Affected individuals may experience difficulties in the voicing of specific vowels sounds such as in the words “eat,” “back,” “I,” “olives,” or “nest”.
Abductor SD affects the muscles that draw the vocal cords apart. Abductor SD is characterized by breathy, whispered speech and loss of voice for short periods of time (aphonia). Individuals affected by the abductor type may have difficulty controlling speech after certain sounds (e.g., “h,” “s,” “p,” “t,” or “k”).
Some affected individuals may exhibit both types, referred to as mixed SD. Some individuals also experience a vocal tremor, in which the larynx and vocal cords shake potentially affecting speech and making the voice difficult to understand because it sounds shaky or quivery.  Other less common manifestations of LD include laryngeal breathing dystonia, singer’s dystonia, repetitive coughing, and others.
Onset of LD is usually gradual and the initial symptoms may be mild. Symptoms may progress for the first 2-5 years then generally stabilize. Approximately 15% of patients progress into other forms of dystonia involving the face or neck. The disorder usually remains chronic without marked changes over a period of years, although symptoms may worsen with stress. The number and severity of symptoms varies widely among affected individuals.

