Laryngotracheoesophageal Cleft

synonyms:
laryngeal cleftlaryngotracheal cleft (LC)LTEClaryngo-tracheo-esophageal cleftlaryngo-tracheo-esophageal diastemaposterior laryngeal cleft (PLC)

overview:
SummaryA laryngotracheoesophageal cleft (LTEC), commonly referred to as a laryngeal cleft, is an abnormal connection between the airway/windpipe (larynx and trachea) and the esophagus. A LTEC is a congenital disorder, meaning it is present at the time of birth. Children are usually diagnosed in the first two years of life. Symptoms typically appear within the first few months of life and are primarily related to difficulty eating and breathing. Symptoms may vary depending on the severity of the cleft. Children may have problems feeding and swallowing, difficulty gaining weight appropriately, coughing, hoarseness, acid reflux, noisy breathing, lung infections or trouble getting enough oxygen (respiratory distress). Treatment generally consists of surgery to repair and close the connection between the airway and esophagus. Children with milder forms of LTEC may not require surgery.
IntroductionIn the neck, there are two main passageways—the airway in front which allows air to travel to the lungs and the esophagus behind it which moves food to the stomach. The voice box (larynx) and a large flap called the epiglottis sit above the trachea and help prevent food or liquid from entering the lungs.
During the initial stages of human development (in the womb), there is only one passageway, which eventually separates into two tubes: the airway and esophagus. Normally, the trachea and esophagus separate completely so there is no connection between them. If this division is not successfully completed, a connection remains between the airway and the esophagus. This connection is called a laryngeal cleft or laryngotracheoesophageal cleft depending on how deep the cleft extends. Due to this abnormal connection, food and liquids can enter the airway from the esophagus and air can enter the esophagus from the airway. This causes problems with breathing and swallowing.

symptoms:
When there is a connection between an infant’s airway and esophagus, food and liquid can pass into the lungs. This can lead to a variety of problems, including chronic cough, frequent lung infections, a high-pitched gasping sound usually heard during breathing in (stridor), a high-pitched musical sound usually heard when breathing out (wheezing), skin turning blue (cyanosis), pauses in breathing (apnea) and respiratory distress. Affected children often have feeding difficulties such as gagging, choking or coughing during eating, which can lead to failure to gain weight. Signs and symptoms of LTEC often begin in the first few days of life if the cleft is severe enough to affect feeding and breathing. Milder LTEC may not be diagnosed until years later.
The classification of laryngeal and laryngotracheoesophageal clefts differs depending on the size and type of connection between the airway and esophagus. The mildest form (type I) is a deep groove extending up until the vocal cords. This is the most common type. A type II cleft extends into the cricoid cartilage below the vocal cords. Type III clefts extend completely through the cricoid cartilage, while type IV clefts continue deeper into the windpipe (trachea) or even into the lungs. Type IV clefts are the most severe form and occur less frequently.

