Laurence-Moon Syndrome

synonyms:
adipogenital-retinitis pigmentosa syndromeLNMSLMS

overview:
Summary

Laurence-Moon syndrome (LNMS) is a genetic condition that results in a complex association of problems that affect several different body parts. People with LNMS may have difficulties with functions of the brain, eyes, ears, stomach, kidneys, hands and feet. They often also demonstrate a tendency to short stature and obesity. Because of the many complications seen in this condition, it is important that the patient has a strong, comprehensive health care team.

Introduction

LNMS was later termed Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Biedl syndrome because of similarities with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS). It is often considered, but still debated, whether BBS is a distinct condition. Arguments are based on differences in the underlying genetic causes of these the disorders (see Related Disorders). These two disorders also share similarity to Oliver-McFarlane syndrome (OMS). All three conditions are characterized by progressive blindness, obesity, and learning disabilities.
Differences in the clinical presentation include subtle but important hints as offered in the following examples. LNMS is associated with difficulty in controlling body movements, which is also seen in adolescent and adult patients with OMS and less frequently in BBS. LNMS and OMS are associated with abnormal pituitary gland function. BBS is associated with extra fingers and toes, and kidney and liver dysfunction. OMS is associated with abnormal growth of eyelashes and eyebrows.  Neither LNMS nor BBS are generally associated with such difficulty.
Of important note to patients and physicians, the practical management of these conditions is similar. These conditions are all managed with close attention to each individual patient’s symptoms. This contributes to the ability to group LNMS, BBS, and OMS together in clinical settings. For the purposes of the description of these entities by what is known of their genetic cause, we have drawn stricter differentiating lines between them and offer distinct articles on each related disorder.

symptoms:
The major signs that people present with which raise the suspicion that they may have LNMS are summarized below. The individual components of this condition can notably vary greatly in severity however.
Physicians may begin to investigate the diagnosis of a genetic condition when they identify structural abnormalities of the hands and feet. Abnormalities commonly include both too many and too few fingers or toes. Between LMS and BBS, it is the people with BBS that are born with an extra digit near the pinky or an extra toe near the fifth “little” toe. In medical terminology, this is described as a ‘postaxial polydactyly’. Interestingly, the presence of an extra toe is more common than that of an extra finger. In patients with LNMS, fingers and toes may however have some degree of webbing, which is referred to as “syndactyly”. Syndactyly is especially common between the second and third toes. Less often, fingers and toes may be abnormally short in length. This finding is called a “brachydactyly” and can be especially expected to affect the thumb. The thumb may additionally be placed subtly closer to the wrist than expected. Finally, the feet may also be overall short in length, of wide width, and carry a flat arch.
In regard to additional skeletal changes, patients with LNMS may notice or be told that they have some slight changes in the basic shape of their teeth. Teeth are made up of two major segments, the body and roots. Patients with LNMS may experience taurodontism, in which the development of tooth’s body is enlarged relative to the roots. Most commonly, it is the flat, molar teeth at the back of the mouth that are affected. Most commonly, this condition is noted at the time of first dental x-rays, where the teeth will appear more rectangular than expected.
People with LNMS are also often burdened by problems with the coordination of their body’s movements. Many patients report a significant degree of clumsiness and often walk with legs in a wide-based stance. Walking heel-to-toe may be difficult. Such impairment is specifically the result of problems with the cerebellum, the sub-section of the brain responsible for coordination. The dysfunction of the cerebellum can lead to dysfunction of the spinal nerve conduction pathways that communicate signals between the brain and muscles. This results in a complex constellation of movement irregularities. The term ataxia is used to describe this loss of control over coordinated bodily movements, and can make it difficult to speak, eat, walk, and maintain balance. Ataxia is accompanied by spasticity, a continuous contraction of muscles in an involuntary manner. The term contracture is used to describe a hardening and shortening of muscles and surrounding connective tissue.
People with LNMS also often experience other problems related to functions controlled by the brain.
Most patients with LNMS will experience a gradual loss of vision. The term “retinitis pigmentosa” is used to describe the particular, gradual-onset, vision loss that progresses according to a particular pattern. Retinitis pigmentosa begins with a night blindness that worsens with a loss of the ability to distinguish colors from one another, finally deteriorating into “tunnel vision”. (For more information, choose “Retinitis Pigmentosa” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database).
Mild-to-moderate learning difficulties are common in individuals with LNMS. Often, learning disabilities are attributed to weakened cognitive capacity. Some individuals affected with LNMS may have true learning disabilities due to dysfunction of brain development. However, it is important to be sure that suspected disabilities (such as delayed speech or reading skills) are not due to underlying visual impairment. If the learning disability is rooted in neurological impairments, they are often associated with symptoms of poor coordination, gross and fine motor skills, and social milestones in childhood such as inability to play complicated games with other children.
People living with LNMS have been found to have smaller than average size anterior pituitary glands and can suffer from a series of different complications as a result. The anterior portion of the pituitary gland is responsible for regulating many functions including the body’s metabolism, emotional responses to stressors, physical bodily growth, and reproductive capacity. The body’s metabolism is controlled by thyroid stimulating hormone. With low levels of thyroid stimulating hormone, people will experience many different symptoms: fatigue, sensitivity to cold, poor ability to concentrate, weight gain, constipation, shortness of breath. The body will potentially change its common behaviors. For example, skin will become dry and course, hair will fall out, reflexes will slow.
People with LNMS often have decreased levels of the sex hormones estrogen and testosterone. This is also due to the small size of the pituitary gland, a small gland located in the brain that is responsible for producing the chemical signals that orchestrate the production of sex hormones. As a result of a weak signal to produce estrogen and testosterone, the reproductive organs of both men and women living with LNMS may be underdeveloped, resulting in reduced fertility or even infertility. Males with LNMS may have an underdeveloped set of testicles that may be undescended. In females, the uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries are often underdeveloped. Menstruation cycles can be delayed from the average first age of onset and when they do begin, may follow an irregular cycle.
Other less common features that have been reported in patients living with LNMS include a skull shape shorter than average, termed “brachycephaly” and electrical abnormalities of the heart. (For more information, choose “congenital heart block” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database). People may also experience a loss of hearing, increased incidence of diabetes, liver fibrosis, and urinary and genital structural malformations.

