Legionnaires’ Disease

synonyms:
Legionellosis

overview:
Legionnaires’ disease, caused by the aerobic gram-negative coccobacillus Legionella, mostlyL. pneumophila, is an important cause of community-acquired pneumonia (CAP), accounting for approximatively 10% of cases. The exact incidence of Legionnaires’ disease is unknown due to different awareness levels in different countries, diagnostic methods and reporting, but the US Centers for Disease control (CDC) reported nearly 10,000 cases in the USA in 2018. Infection withLegionellaoccurs through the inhalation of an aerosol containing bacteria generated by water droplets, usually coming from a contaminated water system. It does not spread from person-to-person. Legionnaires’ disease often affects individuals over the age of 50, people who are heavy smokers and immunocompromised individuals.
Legionnaires’ disease presents similarly to other bacterial pneumonias, such as pneumococcal pneumonia, with signs and symptoms like high fever, cough, chills, difficulty breathing (dyspnea), headache, chest pain, muscle pain (myalgia) or joint pain (arthralgia). Legionnaires’ disease can present as a more severe illness in some patients, mostly in those who are immunocompromised, and might require hospitalization and intensive care. This disease is treated with an antibiotic monotherapy, which is the use of only one antibiotic, with azithromycin or levofloxacin on an outpatient basis.Legionellapneumonia has a fatality rate of 10% in the community or 25% if healthcare-associated, which is similar to other types of bacterial pneumonia.
Introduction
Legionnaires’ disease was initially recognized in early 1977, when an outbreak of a form of pneumonia affected members attending an American Legion Convention at a hotel in Philadelphia in 1976. The bacterium responsible for the disease was identified and namedLegionella pneumophilaby the CDC. They were later able to identify outbreaks and sporadic cases of this disease dating back to the 1940s, but the causative agent could not be identified at the time becauseLegionella pneumophiladoes not grow on traditional culture media.

symptoms:
Legionnaires’ disease is a respiratory disease, which means it affects the lungs. The lungs are composed of lobes, two for the left and three for the right lung. The air travels in the lungs through the bronchi, then bronchioles and then into alveoli, which are little sacs forming lung tissue. Pneumonia is an inflammation of the lungs caused by an infection, where the alveoli fill with pus and can eventually become solid (consolidation).
The incubation period for Legionnaires’ disease, which is the time between exposure to the infectious agent and the onset of symptoms, is two to 10 days. Longer incubation periods have been recorded in a minority of cases, for example in immunocompromised patients. The prodrome of symptoms, which are the early signs of illness, include headache, muscle pain (myalgia), weakness and fatigue (asthenia) and loss of appetite (anorexia).
The most common signs and symptoms are a high fever up to more than 40oC (104oF), which can be accompanied by a slow heart rate (relative bradycardia); cough, which is productive of purulent sputum in approximately 50% of patients; difficulty breathing (dyspnea); neurological abnormalities such as confusion, delirium and lethargy; muscle or joint pain (myalgia or arthralgia); diarrhea; chest pain, which is often worse on inspiration (pleuritic) and on the side affected by the pneumonia; headache; and, nausea or vomiting.
A small proportion of affected individuals can show non-respiratory manifestations such as an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly) or spleen rupture; inflammation of the pericardium, which is the bag around the heart (pericarditis); inflammation of the heart muscle (myocarditis); joint inflammation (arthritis); acute renal failure;  wound infections; and, infections of the central nervous system.
Laboratory findings may include low blood sodium (hyponatremia), low blood phosphorus (hypophosphatemia), abnormal liver function tests, elevated creatine kinase, high C-reactive protein levels and blood in the urine (microscopic hematuria). These findings are common but are non-specific to Legionnaires’ disease. Radiographic finding on a chest X-Ray include pulmonary infiltrates, which are usually patchy and affecting only one lobe (unilobar) and progressing to consolidation of the surrounding lung tissue. However, there is no specific radiographic features suggestive of Legionnaires’ disease, and all the types of infiltrates have been reported in Legionnaires’ disease cases.

