Leigh Syndrome

synonyms:
classical Leigh syndromeLeigh necrotizing encephalopathyLeigh's diseasenecrotizing encephalomyelopathy of Leigh'sSNEsubacute necrotizing encephalopathy

overview:
Leigh syndrome is a rare genetic neurometabolic disorder. It is characterized by the degeneration of the central nervous system (i.e., brain, spinal cord, and optic nerve). The symptoms of Leigh syndrome usually begin between the ages of three months and two years, but some patients do not exhibit signs and symptoms until several years later. Symptoms are associated with progressive neurological deterioration and may include loss of previously acquired motor skills, loss of appetite, vomiting, irritability, and/or seizure activity. As Leigh syndrome progresses, symptoms may also include generalized weakness, lack of muscle tone (hypotonia), and episodes of lactic acidosis, which may lead to impairment of respiratory and kidney function. Several different genetically determined enzyme defects can cause the syndrome, initially described over 60 years ago. Most individuals with Leigh syndrome have defects of mitochondrial energy production, such as deficiency of an enzyme of the mitochondrial respiratory chain complex or the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. In most cases, Leigh syndrome is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. However, X-linked recessive and maternal inheritance, due to a mitochondrial DNA mutation, are additional modes of transmission.

symptoms:
The symptoms of classical Leigh syndrome (infantile necrotizing encephalopathy), a rapidly progressive neurological disorder, usually begin between the ages of 3 months and 2 years. In most children, the first noticeable sign is the loss of previously acquired motor skills. When there is early onset (i.e., 3 months), loss of head control and poor sucking ability may be the first noticeable symptoms. This may be accompanied by a profound loss of appetite, recurrent vomiting, irritability, continuous crying and possible seizure activity. Delays in reaching developmental milestones may also occur. Affected infants may fail to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive).
If the onset of Leigh syndrome is later in childhood (e.g., 24 months), a child may experience difficulty articulating words (dysarthria) and coordinating voluntary movements such as walking or running (ataxia). Previously acquired intellectual skills may diminish and intellectual disability may also occur.
Progressive neurological deterioration associated with Leigh syndrome is marked by a variety of symptoms including generalized weakness, lack of muscle tone (hypotonia), clumsiness, tremors, muscle spasms (spasticity) that result in slow, stiff movements of the legs, and/or the absence of tendon reflexes. Further neurological development is delayed.
Episodes of lactic acidosis may occur and are characterized by abnormally high levels of lactic acid in the blood, brain and other tissues of the body. Periodically, levels of carbon dioxide in the blood may also be abnormally elevated (hypercapnia). Lactic acidosis and hypercapnia can lead to psychomotor regression and respiratory, heart, or kidney impairment.
Children with Leigh syndrome usually develop respiratory problems including the temporary cessation of spontaneous breathing (apnea), difficulty breathing (dyspnea), abnormally rapid breathing (hyperventilation), and/or abnormal breathing patterns (Cheyne-Stokes). Some infants may also experience difficulty swallowing (dysphagia). Visual problems may include abnormally rapid eye movements (nystagmus), sluggish pupils, crossed eyes (strabismus), paralysis of certain eye muscles (ophthalmoplegia), deterioration of the nerves of the eyes (optic atrophy), and/or visual impairment leading to blindness.
Leigh syndrome may also affect the heart. Some children with this disorder may have abnormal enlargement of the heart (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy) and overgrowth of the fibrous membrane that divides the various chambers of the heart (asymmetric septal hypertrophy). Disease affecting the nerves outside of the central nervous system (peripheral neuropathy) may eventually occur, causing progressive weakness of the arms and legs.
The symptoms of the X-linked infantile form of Leigh syndrome are similar to those of classical Leigh syndrome. The symptoms of the adult-onset form of Leigh syndrome (subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy), a very rare form of the disorder, generally begin during adolescence or early adulthood. Initial symptoms are generally related to vision and may include such abnormalities as blurred “filmy” central visual fields (central scotoma), colorblindness, and/or progressive visual loss due to degeneration of the optic nerve (bilateral optic atrophy). The neurological problems associated with the disease progress slowly in this form of the disorder. At about 50 years of age, affected individuals may find it progressively difficult to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia). Additional late symptoms may include partial paralysis and involuntary muscle movements (spastic paresis), sudden muscle spasms (clonic jerks), grand mal seizures, and/or varying degrees of dementia.

