Leiomyosarcoma, Inferior Vena Cava

overview:
Leiomyosarcoma of the inferior vena cava is an extremely rare malignant (cancerous) tumor arising from the smooth muscle lining the walls of the large vein that carries blood from the lower body to the heart (inferior vena cava). There are essentially two types of muscles in the body – voluntary and involuntary. Smooth muscles are involuntary muscles – the brain has no conscious control over them. Smooth muscles react involuntarily in response to various stimuli. For example, the smooth muscle in walls of blood vessels contracts to help regulate blood flow.
Leiomyosarcomas are a form of cancer. The term “cancer” refers to a group of diseases characterized by abnormal, uncontrolled cellular growth that invades surrounding tissues and may spread (metastasize) to distant bodily tissues or organs via the bloodstream, the lymphatic system, or other means. Different forms of cancer, including leiomyosarcomas, are graded according to certain histological parameters evaluated microscopically and this grade (low, intermediate, or high) gives the clinician an indication of the potential clinical aggressiveness of the tumor.
Leiomyosarcoma is classified as a soft tissue sarcoma. Sarcomas are malignant tumors that arise from the connective tissue, which connects, supports and surrounds various structures and organs in the body. Soft tissue includes fat, muscle, nerve, tendons, tissue surrounding the joints (synovial tissue), and blood and lymph vessels. The exact cause of sarcomas including leiomyosarcomas is unknown.

symptoms:
The symptoms associated with a leiomyosarcoma of the IVC vary greatly from case to case. The exact location and size of the tumor within the vena cava determines the specific symptoms that occur and whether or not the tumor can be removed surgically. The inferior vena cava runs from the pelvis to the thoracic cavity, emptying into the heart. The inferior vena cava is connected to numerous veins including the main vein of the liver (hepatic vein) and the main vein of the kidneys (renal vein). Most tumors occur in the middle portion of the IVC (i.e., between the hepatic and renal veins or the lower portion of the IVC (i.e., below the renal vein). Less often, a leiomyosarcoma develops within the upper portion of the IVC (i.e., above the hepatic vein).
Many individuals with a leiomyosarcoma of the inferior vena cava do not exhibit any symptoms (asymptomatic). The tumor may grow and spread without any apparent signs. Eventually, some individuals may develop a palpable mass in the stomach. Vague, general symptoms may occur including abdominal pain, fever, weakness, weight loss, vomiting, difficulty breathing (dyspnea), and night sweats.
A leiomyosarcoma’s location within the IVC may be associated with additional symptoms specific to that area. Tumors in the lower portion of the inferior vena cava may be associated with lower back pain and generalized swelling due to the abnormal accumulation of fluid (edema), especially in the legs and around the eyes. A leiomyosarcoma of the middle portion may cause narrowing or blockage (occlusion) of the renal vein resulting in nephrotic syndrome – a kidney condition characterized by protein in the urine, low blood protein levels, and edema affecting the limbs and the area around the eyes.
A leiomyosarcoma of the upper segment may cause the development of Budd-Chiari syndrome and, in extremely rare cases, irregular heartbeat rhythms (arrhythmia). (For more information on this disorder, see the Related Disorders section of this report.)
Another complication associated with a leiomyosarcoma of the IVC is deep vein thrombosis (DVT), a condition characterized by blood clots (thrombosis) in the deep veins of the lower legs or thigh that often hamper circulation. A piece of the blood clot can potentially break off and travel to another area of the body (embolize) where it lodges in a vein or artery cutting off blood flow to a vital organ such as the brain or lungs.

