Leishmaniasis

overview:
Summary
Leishmaniasis is an infectious disease caused by protozoan parasites of the genus,Leishmania. Protozoa are microscopic, single-cell organisms. The parasites that cause the disease are transmitted to people through the bites of certain species of infected sand flies. In humans, these parasites cause three main forms of infection: cutaneous leishmaniasis, mucosal leishmaniasis and visceral leishmaniasis. In each of these forms, infection ranges from causing no symptoms (asymptomatic infection) to severe, even life-threatening complications. Only a small percentage of people infected byLeishmaniaparasites will go on to develop disease. Leishmaniasis is seldom encountered in the United States. Most people from the U.S. who become infected do so because of travel to or living in regions around the world where the disease is common. Military personnel and contractors who serve in those areas are also at risk. In rare instances, there have been reports of cutaneous leishmaniasis acquired in the U.S. in Texas and Oklahoma.
Introduction
Leishmaniasis is broadly classified based upon its location in the Western or Eastern hemispheres. In the Western Hemisphere the disease is known as New World leishmaniasis, and is found in some areas of Mexico, Central America and South America. In the Eastern Hemisphere, the disease is known as Old World leishmaniasis, and is found in certain parts of Asia, the Middle East, southern Europe (particularly the Mediterranean area), North Africa and tropical regions of Africa. New World and Old World leishmaniasis are caused by differentLeishmaniaspecies.

symptoms:
Leishmaniasis can affect people in different ways. Some have truly silent infection, and do not develop any signs or symptoms. Other people develop mild to moderate disease, but some develop severe infection which can lead to permanent damage and potentially life-threatening complications.
CUTANEOUS LEISHMANIASISThis is the most common form of leishmaniasis. Symptoms may begin within weeks to months after being bitten by an infected sand fly. Affected individuals may develop one or more sores (skin lesions), particularly on exposed parts of the body such as the face, ears and the arms and legs. The lesions form at the site where the bite occurs. The lesions may be papules (bumps) or nodules (solid, raised bumps), plaques (spread out, raised lesions) or ulcers (open, eroded areas like craters). Skin lesions may change in size, becoming smaller but often enlarge and do not heal. Sores may be moist and leak fluid (like pus) or may be dry and crust over and are usually painless. Individuals may develop lesions that are limited to one area of the body and may slowly heal on their own over 6-18 months. Lesions, however, usually leave noticeable scars. Sometimes, individuals also have swollen, adjacent lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy).
Diffuse Cutaneous LeishmaniasisThis very rare form is characterized by an initial skin lesion that spreads to affect the skin of multiple different areas of the body. Individuals often have a poorly functioning immune system, which leaves them susceptible to widespread involvement of the skin, predisposes to a poor response to treatment and permits infection to last indefinitely. Affected individuals may have multiple plaques, ulcers and nodules all over their body. Diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis progresses slowly but is a chronic condition that routinely recurs after treatment even if treatment appears to have been initially effective.
Leishmaniasis RecidivansThis term is used to define the recurrence of a skin lesion years after the initial lesion healed. Leishmaniasis recidivans often develops on the face, particularly the cheek, with a new ulcer or papule forming over or near the scar of the old lesion. Sometimes this lesion may slowly grow larger.
MUCOSAL LEISHMANIASISParasites can spread from the initial skin lesion via the bloodstream to other distant sites such as the mucous membranes of the nose, mouth and throat. Individuals with mucosal leishmaniasis typically have had a skin lesion that healed on its own or with treatment, only to develop mucous membrane involvement often several years or sometimes decades later. Persistent stuffiness in or bleeding from the nose may be the first signs of the disease. Inflammation and partial to total destruction of the mucous membranes of the mouth, nose and throat can eventually occur. If untreated, mucosal leishmaniasis can cause disfiguring damage and scarring to the nose and mouth. Nasal obstruction and bleeding may result from this damage. Complications can be difficult to treat and progressively worsen. Mucosal leishmaniasis can develop in people who were not treated or were originally inadequately treated for cutaneous leishmaniasis. Known risk factors for the development of mucosal disease include infection with particular parasite species often found in South America; skin lesions which are multiple, large, long-lasting or on the head or neck; a suppressed immune system; or infection acquired in Bolivia.
VISCERAL LEISHMANIASISThis form of leishmaniasis, usually the most severe form clinically, also develops if certain parasite species escape from the skin, enter the bloodstream and reach internal organs including the spleen, liver and bone marrow. Clinical findings range from asymptomatic infection to mild disease that resolves on its own to a severe, life-threatening infection. If symptoms develop and the full-blown disease is left untreated, visceral leishmaniasis is usually fatal.
Affected individuals may develop repeated bouts of prolonged fever, weakness, unintended weight loss or even severe wasting of the body (cachexia), significant enlargement of the spleen and liver and pancytopenia (low levels of the three main types of blood cells: red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets). A low level of red blood cells is called anemia and can produce fatigue, paleness of the skin (pallor), shortness of breath, lightheadedness, dizziness and a fast or irregular heartbeat. Affected individuals often become progressively worse over weeks to months.
Visceral leishmaniasis is also called kala-azar in India. Kala-azar is Hindi for black fever and usually refers to severe, chronic cases of the disease. A variety of additional names can be used for visceral leishmaniasis including Dum-dum fever, Burdwan fever, Sirkari disease and Sahib’s disease.
Post-Kala-Azar Dermal LeishmaniasisThis form of infection occurs in people who have or have had visceral leishmaniasis. It is most common in Africa and India. In Africa (e.g., Sudan), the disease is present or noted shortly after diagnosis and treatment for visceral leishmaniasis. Individuals may develop a raised rash on the face, buttocks and arms and legs. These lesions heal on their own over time or following treatment for visceral infection.
In India, post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis develops several years after treatment for visceral leishmaniasis. Individuals often develop multiple, flat discolored areas of skin (macules). Eventually, these lesions turn into plaques or nodules on the face and trunk. In India, this form requires intensive treatment.
Leishmaniasis-HIV CoinfectionSome people are infected by both the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and leishmaniasis. These people have a greater chance of developing severe, life-threatening complications and death. They may develop complications not normally seen in otherwise healthy people with leishmaniasis including involvement of the gastrointestinal tract and other atypical sites. Because of HIV-associated immunodeficiency, treatment may be ineffective, and relapse rates are high even after apparently effective treatment.

