Lennox-Gastaut Syndrome

synonyms:
LGS

overview:
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (LGS) is a severe form of epilepsy that typically becomes apparent during infancy or early childhood. Affected children experience several different types of seizures, most commonly atonic, tonic and atypical absence seizures. Children with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome may also develop cognitive dysfunction, delays in reaching developmental milestones and behavioral problems. Lennox-Gastaut syndrome can be caused by a variety of underlying conditions, but in some cases no cause can be identified. Lennox-Gastaut syndrome can be difficult to treat because it is resistant (refractory) to many kinds of antiseizure medications. Research is ongoing to identify and assess new therapies for Lennox-Gastaut syndrome.
There is no consensus in the medical literature on the exact definition of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. Generally, three findings are necessary for the diagnosis: multiple generalized seizure types; a slow spike-and-wave pattern (less than 2.5 Hz) on EEG; and cognitive dysfunction. The International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) Task Force recently classified the disorder as a developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE). Developmental and epileptic encephalopathies are a group of disorders in which seizure activity can lead to progressive cognitive dysfunction.

symptoms:
The symptoms of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome usually begin during infancy or childhood, most often between 3 to 5 years of age. Multiple types of seizures, which are basically electrical disturbances in the brain, affect children with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. Most affected individuals experience multiple types of seizures, multiple times throughout the day. As affected individuals grow older, the types and frequency of seizure activity may change.
The most common types of seizures associated with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome are tonic and atonic seizures. Tonic seizures cause increased muscle tone and muscle stiffness. They are characterized by sustained muscle contractions that can cause mild abnormalities such as a slight bend of the body and brief interruption of breathing or more significant problems such as muscle spasms of the face and flexion or extension of the arms and legs. Affected children may extend their arms over their heads similar to a ballet dancer. Tonic seizures are usually brief (lasting between a few seconds and a minute) and are especially prevalent at night during sleep but can also occur during the day. There is usually a brief loss of consciousness during a tonic seizure. Tonic seizures that occur when awake can cause affected individuals to fall.
Atonic seizures cause a sudden loss of muscle tone and limpness. They can cause the head to drop or nod, problems with posture or sudden falls. Atonic seizures are also known as drop attacks. Atonic seizures can lead to injuries to the head and face because of sudden, unexpected falls. When sitting, affected individuals may collapse forward or backward at the waist. Atonic seizures may only partially affect consciousness and usually last only a few seconds.
A third type of seizure commonly associated with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome is atypical absence seizures. This type of seizure is associated with a period of unconsciousness usually marked by unresponsive staring. Absence seizures usually begin and end abruptly and the affected individual usually resumes activity with no memory of the episode. Absence seizures do not cause convulsions and may be so mild that they go unnoticed. They usually last only a couple to several seconds. If the child is developmentally delayed, the parents may only notice a subtle change in function or responsiveness.
Additional types of seizures can affect individuals with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome less often. These include myoclonic seizures, which are characterized by abnormal, jerky movements and may occur alone or in conjunction with atypical absence seizures; tonic-clonic seizures (once known as grand mal seizures), which last a couple of minutes and are characterized by stiffening of the limbs and then jerking of the limbs and face; and partial or focal seizures, which involve electrical abnormalities in a limited area of the brain and come in a variety of forms. Some individuals with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome experience prolonged, uninterrupted seizure activity that lasts for more than 30 minutes (nonconvulsive status epilepticus). Nonconvulsive status epilepticus may be associated with a child being unaware or inattentive and, in some cases, may be so subtle that it goes unnoticed. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus requires medical intervention.
Intelligence is usually, but not always, affected in children with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. Affected children may experience varying degrees of cognitive dysfunction and delays in reaching developmental milestones such as sitting, crawling or walking. Children with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome may develop normally before the onset of seizures, and then lose previously acquired skills (psychomotor regression). Because the seizures associated with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome are usually resistant to treatment, intellectual impairment and learning problems may worsen over time. Children with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome may also develop behavioral problems ranging from hyperactivity and irritability to autistic symptoms and psychosis.
Some individuals with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome may have been initially affected by infantile spasms (West syndrome), which are characterized by sudden, involuntary contractions of the head, neck and trunk and/or uncontrolled extension of the legs and/or arms.

