Lenz Microphthalmia Syndrome

synonyms:
Lenz dysplasiaLenz syndromemicrophthalmia or anophthalmos with associated anomalies (obsolete)

overview:
Lenz microphthalmia syndrome is an extremely rare inherited disorder characterized by small eyes (microphthalmos or microphthalmia) and/or droopy eyelids (blepharoptosis), resulting in visual impairment. Rarely, affected infants may exhibit complete absence of the eyes (anophthalmos or anophthalmia). Additional physical anomalies are often associated, including a small head (microcephaly) and/or anomalies of the teeth, ears and/or fingers and/or toes (digits). The range and severity of findings may vary from person to person. Most affected children also exhibit developmental delays and intellectual disability.
Lenz microphthalmia syndrome is caused by pathogenic variants, or changes, in theBCORgene and is inherited in an X-linked pattern. This condition is fully expressed in males only. However, females who carry a variantBCORgene may exhibit some symptoms, such as microcephaly, short stature and/or anomalies of the fingers and/or toes.

symptoms:
In affected males, the primary physical characteristic associated with Lenz microphthalmia syndrome is small eyes (one eye or both). In most cases, both eyes are affected and the eyes maybe of different size (bilateral, asymmetrical microphthalmos/microphthalmia). The front (anterior), clear portion of the eye through which light passes (cornea) may be small (microcornea). In addition, the colored portion of the eye (iris) may be differently formed with absent tissue (coloboma), giving the iris a “keyhole” appearance. Colobomas may also affect other parts of the eye, including the ciliary body, choroid and/or optic disc. In many patients, the upper eyelids may droop (blepharoptosis) due to paralysis of muscles that control the eyelids. In rare cases, affected infants may exhibit absence or only rudimentary (vestigial) portions of the eyes (anophthalmos/anophthalmia). Such eye findings may result in varying degrees of visual impairment or, in some people, blindness. The degree of visual impairment depends upon the severity and/or combination of eye abnormalities present.
Affected males may exhibit mild to severe delays in attaining certain developmental milestones (e.g., crawling, sitting independently, walking, etc.) and intellectual disability ranging from mild to severe.
Most infants with Lenz microphthalmia syndrome also exhibit additional physical findings, such as anomalies of the head and facial (craniofacial) area. These usually include a small head (microcephaly) and anomalies of the ears and teeth. In most infants with this disorder, the ears are flexed forward (anteverted), and the ear lobes may be large; however, in some children, the ears may also be small and underdeveloped (hypoplastic). Hearing impairment may be present in some people. The teeth may be widely spaced or abnormally crowded. In addition, the front teeth (incisors) may be absent (dental agenesis or anodontia) or malformed. Some affected males may exhibit incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate) and/or a vertical groove or incomplete closure of the upper lip (cleft lip).
Most males with the disorder also have skeletal anomalies. These may include a lateral (sideways) and front-to-back (anterior-posterior) curvature of the spine (kyphoscoliosis), narrow and/or sloping shoulders, underdeveloped collarbones (hypoplastic clavicles) and/or a differently shaped rib cage (thoracic cage).
In addition, infants with Lenz microphthalmia syndrome often exhibit anomalies of the fingers and/or toes (digits). The digits may be bent (clinodactyly), flexed (camptodactyly) and/or joined (syndactyly). In some people, double thumbs may also be present.
Approximately half of affected males may also have abnormalities of the reproductive and urinary (genitourinary) systems. These malformations may include failure of the testes to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism), placement of the urinary opening (meatus) on the underside of the penis (hypospadias) and/or underdevelopment (hypoplasia) or absence (agenesis) of a kidney (renal agenesis).
Females who carry a single variant in the gene for Lenz microphthalmia syndrome (heterozygous carriers) may exhibit some of the symptoms associated with the disease. In this situation, the symptoms are typically milder than those associated with the fully expressed disorder in males. Heterozygous females may have anomalies in the fingers and/or toes (digital anomalies), a small head (microcephaly) and/or short stature.

