Leprechaunism

synonyms:
Donohue syndrome

overview:
Leprechaunism is an extremely rare disorder characterized by abnormal resistance to insulin that results in a variety of distinguishing characteristics, including growth delays and abnormalities affecting the endocrine system (i.e., the system of glands that secrete hormones into the blood system). Affected infants may also have distinctive characteristics of the head and face (craniofacial region), low birth weight, skin abnormalities, and enlargement of the breast and clitoris in females and the penis in males. Leprechaunism is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.

symptoms:
Leprechaunism is characterized by growth delays, as well as abnormalities of the head and face (craniofacial region) and of the endocrine system. Many of the symptoms associated with leprechaunism are present at birth (congenital). The range and severity of symptoms and physical characteristics may vary from person to person.
Most infants with leprechaunism exhibit delayed growth before and after birth (pre- and postnatal growth deficiency), delayed bone age or maturation. Affected infants tend to have a low birth weight, may fail to gain weight or grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive), and may become abnormally thin (emaciated). They often lack muscle mass.
Infants with leprechaunism have distinctive facial features, including abnormally large, low-set and poorly developed ears; an unusually flat bridge of the nose; large, thick lips; an abnormally large mouth (macrostomia); and widely spaced eyes (hyptertelorism). Affected infants may also have an abnormally small head (microcephaly).
Leprechaunism is associated with abnormal darkening and thickening of patches of skin in certain areas of the body (acanthosis nigricans), unusual thickening of the skin (pachyderma), excessive hair growth (hirsutism), and malformation (dysplasia) of the nails. In addition, infants with leprechaunism exhibit absence of most of the body fat under the skin (subcutaneous adipose tissue).
Leprechaunism is also characterized by abnormalities of the endocrine system (i.e., the system of glands that secrete hormones into the blood system). Such abnormalities include excessive secretion of the hormone insulin (hyperinsulinemia). Insulin regulates blood sugar (glucose) levels by promoting the movement of glucose into bodily cells. Infants with leprechaunism fail to use insulin effectively (insulin resistant). Because of this, they may experience abnormally high blood sugar levels (hyperglycemia) after eating a meal (postprandial) and abnormally low blood sugar levels (hypoglycemia) when not eating.
Additional abnormalities resulting from improper function of the endocrine system include abnormal enlargement of the breast and clitoris in females and the penis in males. In some cases, cysts have formed in the ovaries. Hypertrophic cadiomyopathy may be seen in these patients as in diabetic mother babies.
Infants with leprechaunism may have additional abnormalities, including intellectual disability, abnormally large hands and feet, an unusually widened (dilated) or enlarged (distended) stomach, abnormal amounts of iron in the liver, and/or stoppage of the flow of bile (cholestasis) from the liver. In addition, affected infants may experience protrusion of portions of the large intestine through an abnormal opening in musculature lining the abdominal cavity in the area of the groin (inguinal hernia) or protrusion of part of the intestine through the abdominal wall near the navel (umbilical hernia). Affected infants are also more susceptible to repeated infections.

