LEPR Deficiency

synonyms:
obesity, morbid, due to leptin receptor deficiencyobesity due to leptin receptor gene deficiencyleptin receptor deficiencyLepR deficiency

overview:
Summary
LEPR deficiency is a rare, inherited condition that affects how the body processes energy, responds to food and stores fat. Most people with this condition are obese before one year of age. Other symptoms include constant hunger and abnormal behaviors related to food. People affected with LEPR deficiency have low levels of sex hormones (hypogonadotropic hypogonadism) resulting in late or absent puberty and infertility. LEPR deficiency is caused by changes (mutations or variants) in theLEPRgene, which is responsible for making the receptor that interacts with a protein called leptin. Leptin is important for regulating appetite and growth of body fat. This condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Diagnosis is based on a clinical examination, symptoms and the results of genetic testing. Diet, behavior modification, exercise programs and bariatric surgery have been used to help manage the symptoms of LEPR deficiency. Treatment is available for this condition using a drug called setmelanotide. With treatment, people with LEPR deficiency develop a normal appetite, lose weight and fat and can maintain the weight loss.
Introduction
LEPR deficiency is rare, making it difficult to predict exactly how it will affect someone who is newly diagnosed with this condition. It is one of several conditions that include early-onset obesity and these conditions can be difficult to distinguish from each other without a careful physical examination and genetic testing.

symptoms:
The symptoms of LEPR deficiency are different from person to person, with the most common symptom being early onset obesity. At birth, babies with LEPR deficiency have a normal weight. The earliest symptoms are constant hunger and excessive eating (hyperphagia) leading to rapid weight gain and obesity before one year of age. People with LEPR deficiency always feel hungry even after eating a full meal and often have abnormal behaviors related to food. Many have low levels of sex hormones (hypogonadotropic hypogonadism) causing delayed or absent puberty and infertility. Other symptoms may include low thyroid hormone and insulin resistance, which can lead to type 2 diabetes. Some children with LEPR deficiency get frequent infections because their immune system doesn’t work correctly. Excessive weight gain can lead to other symptoms such as abnormal bone growth, liver disease and difficultly walking.

