Leptospirosis

synonyms:
Canefield FeverCanicola FeverField FeverMud FeverSeven Day Fever, LeptospirosisSpirochetosisSwineherd Disease

overview:
Leptospirosis is an infectious disease that affects humans and animals. It results in a wide range of symptoms, and some people may have no symptoms at all. It is caused by a spiral-shaped bacterium (spirochete). Symptoms include high fever, chills, muscle aches, headache, vomiting, diarrhea, and jaundice (yellow skin and eyes).
A definitive diagnosis requires laboratory testing of a blood or urine sample. Early detection is important because the disease can cause serious complications if not treated early in its course. These include kidney damage (nephrosis), meningitis (inflammation of the tissue around the brain or spinal cord), respiratory distress and/or liver failure.

symptoms:
The symptoms of leptospirosis vary considerably.  Some people may experience no symptoms at all.  Some may experience moderate or more severe flu-like symptoms.  Some may experience very serious complications if the disease is not treated.
The disorder characteristically occurs in two phases.  The septocemic phase starts abruptly with headache, pain behind the eyeball (retroorbital), lack of appetite (anorexia), severe muscle aches, chills, sweating, nausea, vomiting, and fever.  Constipation, diarrhea, symptoms of the common cold, coughing, chest pain, a stiff neck, and difficulty breathing (dyspnea) may also occur.  Enlargement of the spleen (splenomegaly) and liver (hepatomegaly) are uncommon, but may occur.  This phase usually lasts four to nine days, with recurrent chills and fever that spikes to over 39 degrees C (102 F), and then abates.
The sixth to 12th day of illness marks the immune (or second) phase of leptospirosis.  Antibodies appear in the blood serum.  Fever and earlier symptoms may recur, and symptoms of irritated membranes lining the brain (meninges) may develop.  Examination of the cerebrospinal fluid after the seventh day shows a greater than normal number of cells (pleocytosis) in at least 50 percent of patients.  Inflammation of the iris and the ciliary body behind the iris (iridocyclitis), the optic nerve (optic neuritis), and peripheral disease of the nerves (neuropathy) may occur infrequently.  If acquired during pregnancy, leptospirosis may cause abortion, even during the period of convalescence.

