Leri Pleonosteosis

synonyms:
Pleonosteosis, Leri Type

overview:
Leri Pleonosteosis is an extremely rare inherited disorder characterized by unusual, flattened facial features, abnormalities of the hands and feet, skeletal malformations, short stature, and/or limitation of joint movements. Characteristic abnormalities of the hands and feet may include unusually broad and/or short thumbs and great toes (brachydactyly) that may be bent outward from the body (valgus position); as a result, the hands may have a “spade-shaped” appearance. Skeletal malformations may include knees that are bent backward (genu recurvitum) and abnormal enlargement of the cartilaginous structures that surround the upper portion of the spinal cord (posterior neural arches of the cervical vertebrae). In addition, affected individuals may develop thickened tissue on the palms (palmar) and forearms. Symptoms may vary from case to case. Leri pleonosteosis is inherited as an autosomal dominant genetic trait.

symptoms:
Infants with this disorder typically have a flattened facial appearance that may be similar to that of infants with Down syndrome.  In rare cases, affected infants may also have an abnormally narrow distance between the upper and lower eyelids (blepharophimosis) and/or an unusually small part of the eye through which light passes (microcornea).
Children with Leri pleonosteosis may not grow at the expected rate and eventually exhibit short stature.  They may also exhibit various skeletal abnormalities including stiff joints and, in severe cases, joints that are fixed in a permanently flexed position (contractures).  In some cases, the cartilage that surrounds the upper portion of the spinal cord (posterior neural arches of the cervical vertebrae) may be unusually thick and overgrown.  In addition, affected individuals may have knees that are bent backward (genu recurvatum).  Such skeletal abnormalities may result in limitation of movement, and affected individuals may have an unusual shuffling, short-stepped manner of walking (gait).
Other skeletal malformations associated with Leri pleonosteosis typically affect the hands and feet.  Many infants with this disorder have abnormally short and/or broad fingers (brachydactyly), giving the hands a “spade-shaped” appearance; the toes may also be affected.  In addition, the thumbs and great toes may be bent outward from the body (valgus position).  In some cases, affected children may develop abnormally dense fibrous tissue (fasciae) on the palms, forearms, and/or feet.  Overgrowth (hyperplasia) of fibrous tissue may, in some cases, cause compression of nerves of the feet and/or wrists, resulting in pain, tenderness, and/or other symptoms (e.g., Morton metatarsalgia and/or carpal tunnel syndrome).  (For more information on these conditions, see the Related Disorders section of this report.)   In some rare cases, affected individuals also develop compression of certain nerves of the upper part of the spinal cord.

