Leukocyte Adhesion Deficiency Syndromes

synonyms:
LAD syndromes

overview:
Leukocyte adhesions deficiency (LAD) syndromes are a group of rare disorders affecting the immune system. LAD syndromes are characterized by defects affecting how white blood cells (leukocytes) respond and travel to the site of a wound or infection. Three distinct types of leukocyte adhesion syndrome have been identified. The specific symptoms and the severity of LAD syndromes vary from one person to another. All affected individuals develop an increased susceptibility to developing recurrent bacterial and fungal infections. Additional symptoms may occur depending upon the specific subtype present. LAD syndromes are caused by mutations of specific genes that contain instructions for creating certain proteins that are necessary for white blood cells to travel from the bloodstream to the site of an infection or inflammation. Individuals with severe forms of LAD may have near complete absence of these proteins. Individuals who have milder forms of LAD syndromes have deficient levels of these proteins, but retain some residual protein activity.

symptoms:
The symptoms of LAD syndromes can vary greatly from one person to another based upon the subtype present, the amount of residual protein activity and additional factors. The LAD syndromes are primary immunodeficiency disorders that cause individuals to be abnormally susceptible to developing infections. Affected individuals also have elevated levels of white blood cells (leukocytosis).
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY TYPE IThe symptoms of LAD I can vary from one to person to another. Some individuals have a severe form of the disorder that can cause life-threatening complications; other individuals have a milder form. LAD I is usually characterized by recurrent, often severe, bacterial infections, and delayed detachment of the umbilical cord. Fungal infections are also common. Bacterial and fungal infections most often affect the skin and mucous membranes (mucosal surfaces). The absence of pus formation at the site of infection is an important feature that can indicate a leukocyte adhesion deficiency. Delayed detachment of the umbilical cord often occurs along with infection of the umbilical cord stump (omphalitis). Recurrent, bacterial infections usually develop shortly after birth in LAD I and can cause life-threatening complications in many cases. Individuals with the milder form of LAD I have fewer and less severe infections.
After infancy, affected children may develop progressive inflammation of the tissues that surround and support the teeth (periodontitis) and inflammation of the gums (gingivitis). Periodontitis can eventually cause tooth loss. Wounds either from surgery or trauma are slow to heal (delayed wound healing) and may be more likely to scar. Affected individuals may also develop sores in the area surrounding.
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY TYPE IIInfants with LAD II develop recurrent, bacterial infections. However, the infections and their complications are usually milder than those seen in infants with LAD I. Pneumonia, chronic middle ear infections (otitis media), infection of the tissues that surround and support the teeth (periodontitis) and localized infection of the tissue underneath the surface of the skin (cellulitis) commonly occur in LAD II. The infections are usually not life-threatening and are often treated in an outpatient basis. No pus formation is seen at the site of infection. Generally, the frequency of infections in LAD II decreases after affected individuals reach three years of age. As affected individuals grow older, severe periodontitis is the main infectious complication.
Unlike LAD I, infants with LAD II do not experience a delay in the separation of the umbilical cord. Individuals with LAD II do have additional complications not seen in LAD I including a unique blood type called the Bombay (hh) blood type. Additional features that characterize LAD II include diminished muscle tone resulting in floppiness (hypotonia), distinctive facial features, severe mental retardation and severe growth deficiencies resulting in short stature.
LAD II may also be known as congenital disorder of glycosylation type IIc due to the primary defect in fucose metabolism.
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY TYPE IIIIndividuals with LAD III have recurrent bacterial and fungal infections that follow a similar course of infection as seen in individuals with LAD I. However, these affected individuals also have a bleeding tendency that can cause life-threatening complications. The bleeding complication of LAD III resembles a rare disorder known as Glanzmann thrombasthenia, which is characterized by impaired function of blood cells required for clotting (platelets). Affected individuals have a tendency to bleed easily and profusely especially after surgical procedures. Other symptoms may include susceptibility to easy bruising, nosebleeds (epistaxis), bleeding from the gums (gingival), and/or large red or purple colored spots on the skin that are caused by bleeding under the skin (subcutaneous). The bleeding problem usually starts at birth.
Individuals who were once classified as having LAD I variant (because of the similar disease expression) are now considered to have LAD III because the underlying genetic cause of LAD III is different from the underlying genetic cause of LAD I.

