Leukoencephalopathy with Brain Stem and Spinal Cord Involvement and Lactate Elevation

synonyms:
LBSLmitochondrial aspartyl-tRNA synthetase deficiency

overview:
Leukoencephalopathy with brain stem and spinal cord involvement and lactate elevation (LBSL) is a rare disorder characterized by a range of neurological issues. Affected individuals have disease of the white matter of the brain (leukoencephalopathy). White matter forms what is known as the myelin sheath, which is the protective covering of the nerve fibers. Without white matter, the signals between nerve cells cannot be transmitted properly. Lactate is a metabolite found in the brain; it’s exact role in the brain is not fully understood but it may help to supply energy to nerve cells. Lactate is elevated in most individuals with LBSL. Affected individuals exhibit a variety of symptoms including spasticity, weakness and progressive cerebellar ataxia. Spasticity is stiffness of the muscles, which leads to progressive difficulty with walking and for some, loss of the ability to walk. Cerebellar ataxia is difficulty with coordinating voluntary movements, which can lead a variety of issues including poor manual coordination, difficulty with fine motor tasks, and unsteadiness when walking. LBSL is caused by an abnormal variant (mutation) in theDARS2gene. There is no cure and treatment is aimed at the specific symptoms that are present.

symptoms:
Although researchers have been able to establish some characteristic or “core” symptoms that define LBSL, much about the disorder is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified cases, the lack of large clinical studies, and the fact that many combinations of mutation types can produce this disorder prevent physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals or parents of affected children should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
LBSL is best thought of as a spectrum of disease. It can cause symptoms that develop before birth (neonatally) with severe complications in infancy. Often, newborns or infants who develop symptoms early in infancy pass away within the first couple years of life. Conversely, some individuals may not develop noticeable symptoms until school age or adulthood and these symptoms may remain mild for many years. Except for the most severe form, LBSL usually develops slowly over years.
In most individuals with childhood onset of this disorder, initial development is normal. Most children will walk within a normal age range, but many will require assistance to walk by their teen-age years, their 20s, or later in adulthood. Some will require the use of a wheelchair. The onset, progression and severity will vary. Some individuals may have mild balance problems in their teens that become difficulties with walking (gait disturbance). Most individuals with adult onset of the disorder do not become reliant on a wheelchair.
The most common symptoms experienced in LBSL are spasticity, or stiffness of the muscles, and cerebellar ataxia, which is difficulty coordinating walking and executing fine motor skills. Affected individuals may also have problems sensing the position of their arms and legs. The legs tend to be more severely affected than the arms. Additional symptoms that can occur include seizures, difficulty speaking (dysarthria), hand tremors, rapid, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus), and a decline in cognitive skills, although most affected individuals have normal intellectual abilities. Some children may experience learning disabilities. Sometimes, peripheral neuropathy develops. This a condition that occurs when nerves that carry messages to and from the brain and spinal cord to the rest of the body are damaged. Those affected may experience tingling, burning, numbness, and stabbing pain in the affected extremities.
Individuals with LBSL may be at risk for severe complications following minor head trauma. Minor head trauma can cause loss of consciousness, fever, and neurological decline.

