Levy-Yeboa Syndrome

overview:
Levy-Yeboa syndrome (LYS) is a recently recognized, inherited (congenital), multi-system disorder involving signs of musculoskeletal involvement such as low muscle tone and stiffening of the joints of the arms and legs (contractions), loss of hearing (neuronal deafness), intense burn-like eruptions of the skin containing clear fluid (bullous eruptions) and dangerous gastrointestinal distress involving substantial loss of fluids (secretory diarrhea), among other issues. Most, if not all, of these signs are apparent at, or within a few months of, birth.
Children with Levy-Yeboa syndrome appear to have blank expressions in their faces. This is due to the low tone of the muscles that normally reflect emotions..
As of March 2014, three children of one family have been reliably diagnosed with LYS. A child in another family died before a definitive diagnosis could be made.

symptoms:
MYOPATHY
In the one family, a decrease in fetal movement was noted five weeks before delivery. Clinicians consider the decrease in fetal movement to be the earliest expression of the failure of muscle strength and tone (myopathy) that is so much a part of the syndrome. Further signs of the myopathy include contractures of the arms and legs joints, so that the limbs appear rigidly bent (sharp angulation). The elbows, wrists, hips, and ankles are mainly involved. In addition, the impassive, mask-like, expressionless face is considered to be another sign of the myopathy.
NEUROSENSORY DEAFNESS
Neurosensory deafness was confirmed in early infancy.
DERMATOLOGY
In LYS there are three primary symptoms involving the skin. These are:
1. Eruptions of fluid-filled blisters that resemble a skin disease known as epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS). These blisters were most obvious on the hands and feet, and cleared up in the first 3-6 months.
2. Generalized red (erythematous) rash, described as “fiery” and resembling first and second degree burns, occurs as a result of exposure to antibiotics and other drugs in the course of treatment.
3. Replacement of the red rash by intensely dark colored skin (hyperpigmentation) arising next to linear areas of low pigmentation (hypopigmentation) at the site of scars and punctures from hypodermic needles.
SECRETORY DIARRHEA
The loss of fluids with high sodium content that occurs as a result of secretory diarrhea may result in losses of more than one quart of fluid per day, even in the absence of any oral fluid intake. This is potentially lethal and probably the most dangerous clinical manifestation of LYS. This watery stool is easily overlooked since it may readily be mistaken for urine, delaying treatment with appropriate fluid replacement. Such diarrhea may present at any time from the first month to the sixth month of age, and tends to recur during intercurrent infections. The profuse diarrhea is believed to be responsible for the loss of important micronutrients, such as zinc, which in turn might play a role in the skin disorder. Indeed, skin biopsies suggested nutritional deficiencies and the skin condition improved with zinc replacement.

