Lichen Sclerosus

synonyms:
lichen sclerosus et atrophicusbalanitis xerotica obliterans

overview:
Lichen sclerosus is a chronic inflammatory skin disorder that most commonly affects women before puberty or after menopause. Although rare, it can also be seen in men. When found in males, the disease is known as balanitis xerotica obliterans.
Lichen sclerosus is characterized by skin changes of the external genitalia. The most common distribution is a figure of 8 involving the vulva and perianal area. The head of the penis and other parts of the body may also be affected. In fact, this skin condition can affect any skin surface. Some patients with lichen sclerosus do not have any symptoms, whereas others experience intense itching, discomfort and/or erosions/ulcers. Lichen sclerosus typically has a remitting relapsing course that is complicated by permanent scarring of the affected areas. This produces functional problems such as difficulty in urination, defecation, and intercourse for affected women and difficulty in urination or with erections in men. The disorder is not contagious nor is it a sexually transmitted disease.
Current research supports that it is caused by a combination of a dysfunction of the immunological system and genetic factors. The understanding of the causes of this disorder is still incomplete. The mainstay of treatment is potent topical steroids in the case of genital involvement in women. Studies have shown that regular use of potent topical steroids in women prevents the problems of scarring and decreases risk of skin cancer developing in the area of lichen sclerosus. Potent topical steroids are also a first line treatment for other areas affected by lichen sclerosus. Pelvic floor therapy, surgical intervention to address scarring (such as circumcision in men), and in some cases oral immunosuppressive medicines may also be used. Because lichen sclerosus is associated with increased risk of squamous cell carcinoma in women with genital involvement, it is important for those affected to have life long screening examinations as well as continued treatment to keep the disorder under control.

symptoms:
Lichen sclerosus usually affects the external genitalia (vulva or penis) and/or the area around the anus (perianal region). Sometimes, it is accompanied by intense (intractable) itching, burning, and pain. If the disease is severe, even minor abrasions or chaffing can cause bleeding, tearing, and blistering. The scarring that results from untreated lichen sclerosus produces problems with urination, defecation, and intercourse. The presence of thin, easily irritated, and torn skin affects physical activity and clothing choice.
For children with lichen sclerosus affecting the perianal region, constipation may be among the first signs of the presence of the disease. Lichen sclerosus is much more likely to affect males that have not been circumcised than males that have been.
Rarely, lichen sclerosus can also affect other areas of the skin such as the breast, wrists, shoulder, neck, back, thigh, and the mouth.
Skin tissue often becomes thin, shiny, wrinkled and parchment-like. Fissures, cracks, and purplish patches (ecchymoses) appear frequently. The earliest areas of lichen sclerosus exhibit a porcelain white appearing center surrounded by redness. This grows together to form larger areas of lichen sclerosus. The areas that are prone to rubbing and friction can develop blisters or bruising. The long term result of lichen sclerosus are areas of shiny, thin skin that has a tendency to be dry, crack, or bleed. This also produces loss of the normal parts of the external genitals, narrowing of the opening of the urerthra/vagina/anus, and phimosis (inability to retract the foreskin) in men. The presence of non-healing ulcers or raised ulcerated areas in the external genitalia of women raises suspicion for the development of squamous cell carcinoma.
In males, lichen sclerosus most commonly affects the foreskin of the penis, although it may affect other areas of the body. The opening at the end of the foreskin may become narrow and scarred. Discoloration and skin changes may also occur. Symptoms also include itching, soreness, and painful erections. In men, involvement in the perineal area is rare.
In some rare cases, skin lesions may also develop in the mouth. The lesions consist of bluish-white flat irregular patchy areas on the inside of the cheeks and/or palate. The tongue, lips, and gums may also be involved.

