Lichen Planus

overview:
Lichen planus (LP) is a rare, chronic, inflammatory autoimmune skin and mucous membrane disease. LP most commonly presents as itchy, shiny, reddish-purple spots (lesions) on the skin (cutaneous LP) or as white-gray lesions in the mouth or on the lips (oral LP). Less commonly, LP may also involve the genitals (penile or vulvar LP), scalp (lichen planopilaris), ears (otic LP), nails, eyes, and esophagus. Similar to lichen found growing on trees and rocks in forests, the skin lesions are often flat-topped and can be somewhat scaly, hence the name “lichen” planus.

symptoms:
weeks or months and intermittent recurrences may occur for years. The appearance of the lesions is dependent on their location. In cutaneous LP, the lesions can present anywhere on the skin, usually on the wrists, legs, palms and soles or torso and are 2 to 4 mm in diameter with angular borders, a violet color and a distinct sheen in cross-lighting. These lesions tend to be symmetrically distributed and may also coalesce into rough scaly patches. Rarely, blisters may develop. Moderate to severe itching is common and frequently fails to respond to treatment.
There are several variants of cutaneous LP, which may present differently. The lesions may become large, scaly and warty (hypertrophic LP), particularly on the lower legs. New spots may appear along a site of minor skin injury such as a superficial scratch (Koebner’s phenomenon). Sometimes degeneration (atrophy) of the skin may occur as lesions persist (atrophic LP) and some patients experience an absence of sweating due to degeneration of sweat glands (anhidrosis).
In areas where lesions have healed, an unusual darkening (hyperpigmentation) or lightening (hypopigmentation) of the skin may occur.
Between 50 and 70 percent of patients show symptoms involving “mucous membranes”, the moist pink skin that lines the inside of the mouth, vagina, and esophagus. LP on mucous membranes can present as red, painful sores, or lesions that have a net-like, white pattern. Oral symptoms often occur before skin lesions develop. Oral symptoms, consisting of a dryness and metallic taste or burning in the mouth, may appear first and may be the only evidence of the disease.
Although not common, hair loss may be among the consequences of LP, which is called lichen planopilaris. When and if hair loss does occur, it can involve small patchy areas of the scalp (atrophic cictrical alopecia) or cause a receding hairline (frontal fibrosing alopecia). Due to scarring, this hair loss is permanent if untreated. For more information on lichen planopilaris, visit https://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/diseases/3247/lichen-planopilaris.
Nail LP presents in 10 to 25 percent of LP patients and tends to present as roughness, vertical ridges or cracks, and thinning of the nail. This can eventually lead to scarring of the nail.
Trouble swallowing, or pain with swallowing can indicate esophageal LP. It is important to treat esophageal disease, as it can eventually lead to the esophagus narrowing over time, called esophageal stricture.
Some cases of cutaneous LP will resolve with time, while oral, genital, nail, and esophageal LP are more persistent and may increase in severity over time. Patients with LP are at an increased risk of squamous cell carcinoma, particularly of the oral mucosa, and need to be monitored periodically.

