Liddle Syndrome

synonyms:
pseudoaldosteronismpseudohyperaldosteronism

overview:
Summary

Liddle syndrome is a rare genetic disorder caused by abnormal kidney function that results in high blood pressure (hypertension). This disorder is caused by a disease-causing variant (mutation) in one of 3 genes (SCNN1A,SCNN1B, andSCNN1G) that encode the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC).
While ENaC is present throughout the body in organs such as the lungs and kidney, ENaC activity in the kidney characterizes the clinical presentation. Mutation of one of the 3 genes that cause Liddle syndrome results in higher-than-normal ENaC activity. Over-active ENaC in the distal nephrons of the kidney leads to excessive sodium reabsorption and associated electrolyte imbalances. The excess sodium retention effects blood pressure control, resulting in hypertension that is resistant to most anti-hypertensive medications. Potassium secretion in the kidney is affected, and low concentration of serum blood potassium (hypokalemia) is present in most, but not all, patients.
Plasma renin activity and serum aldosterone levels are low. Severity of hypertension, which is the presenting finding, varies from mild to severe, even in patients in the same family. The symptoms and severity can vary by age, sex and life events such as pregnancy.  Amiloride, a potassium-sparing diuretic, inhibits ENaC, and is the mainstay of therapy. Additional treatment includes a low-salt diet and additional anti-hypertensive medications, as needed.

Introduction

Liddle syndrome is a monogenic cause of hypertension, meaning that a mutation in just one gene (eitherSCNN1A,SCNN1B, orSCNN1G) is sufficient to cause hypertension. Other single gene mutations resulting in hypertension (including familial hyperkalemic hypertension, glucocorticoid remedial aldosteronism, apparent mineralocorticoid excess, and activating mineralocorticoid receptor mutation) also cause hypertension by increasing sodium reabsorption in the kidney. Monogenetic hypertensions are remarkable because most cases of hypertension have no single, identifiable cause and are termed “essential” or “primary” hypertension. While monogenic hypertension disorders are rare, their scientific impact in the understanding of hypertension has been immense. They have led to the identification of the kidney’s role in the pathophysiology of hypertension as well as the importance of dietary salt in hypertension management.
Liddle syndrome is sometimes grouped with other disease processes affecting renal tubules, known as “tubulopathies,” including the subtypes of renal tubular acidosis (proximal, distal, and hyperkalemic) and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. It is also sometimes discussed with other “channelopathies”, or disorders caused by the dysfunction of an ion channel, or regulation of an ion channel (Kim 2014). Ion channels are proteins which facilitate the movement of inorganic ions such as Ca2+, K+, Mg2+, or Na+ across cell membranes. Liddle syndrome is also sometimes grouped as a form of pseudohyperaldosteronism, or conditions that present with similar symptoms to hyperaldosteronism (such as elevated blood pressure, hypokalemia, metabolic acidosis and low levels of plasma renin activity) in the absence of elevated aldosterone. Other kinds of pseudohyperaldosteronism can be caused by mutations to 11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehyrdrogenase type 2 gene, which is responsible for lowering cortisol levels in aldosterone sensitive principal cells of the nephron, congenital overproduction of 11-deoxycorticosterone, tumors, or natural licorice consumption.
The identification of Liddle syndrome as an autosomal dominant, monogenetic renal tubulopathy of the ENaC was driven by the work of Dr. Grant Liddle, the efforts of “GS”‘ the first reported patient, and the pioneering work of Drs. David Warnock, Richard Lifton, Bernard Rossier, Richard Shimkets and Mauricio Botero-Velez. Dr. Warnock has called GS, the patient ‘sparkplug,’ who enabled the charting of the first Liddle syndrome pedigree.
In 1960, Dr. Liddle examined a 16-year-old female (GS) who had been referred to him with a diagnosis of aldosteronism, producing negligible amounts of aldosterone and high levels of sodium in her bloodstream and saliva. In 1963, Liddle wrote the results of her treatment, as well as his treatment of her younger brother. Liddle concluded that the siblings, “had an unusual tendency to conserve sodium and excrete potassium, even in the virtual absence of mineralocorticoids (Liddle and GW 1963). He administered triamterene, an inhibitor of ENaC and designed a low sodium diet. In his article, Dr.  Liddle also presented a survey of 23 family members, noting that their mother and maternal grandmother had both died in their forties of hypertensive vascular disease, but no such issues were identified in the father’s family. Liddle hypothesized that this pseudo-aldosteronism was a familial renal disorder.
In 1989, GS, 43 years old, was admitted to the University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) Medical Center to receive a cadaver kidney transplant. Most fascinating was that the transplanted kidney had “normalized” her ability to process sodium, “curing” her symptoms. Interest in Dr. Liddle’s work was reignited when she identified herself to UAB researchers as the patient described in his 1963 article.
GS facilitated the expansion of her lineage to 43, the results confirming the hypothesis of a familial disorder. The specimens were provided for genetic analysis, to the Howard Hughes Medical lnstitute, Lifton Laboratory at Yale University. The analysis, combined with four other subject specimens, identified the linkage of symptoms with a subunit of the kidney ENaC, the three genes that cause Liddle syndrome. GS lived to learn of the genetic identification, the fruition of Dr. Liddle’s familial renal disorder hypothesis.

symptoms:
There is no overt set of symptoms that is distinct in persons with Liddle syndrome to uniquely distinguish it from other disorders. The lack of an easily observable set of traits in the patient’s physical examination, other than an elevated blood pressure reading, presents difficulties for diagnosis (see sections below on Diagnosis and Related Disorders).
The most notable finding in those with a Liddle syndrome mutation is a high risk of developing hypertension (high blood pressure). Hypertension is estimated to affect about 92% of people with a disease-causing mutation for Liddle syndrome (Tetti et al. 2018). Many Liddle syndrome patients have been observed to develop hypertension at an unusually early age, often in the teenage years (Cui et al. 2017). Resistant hypertension in children and teenagers may alert the clinician to consider tests for Liddle syndrome. The degree of hypertension in patients with Liddle syndrome is variable, as are the downstream effects of hypertension such as damage to other organs caused by high blood pressure.
Typical clinical findings include hypokalemia (low potassium in the blood), hypertension, metabolic alkalosis (high pH in the blood) and low plasma aldosterone and renin activity. Each of these findings is variable, for example, hypokalemia is not found universally among Liddle syndrome patients. The reabsorption of sodium from overactive ENaC in the kidney facilitates a loss of potassium and protons in the urine, causing both hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis. These findings are similar to patients with an excess of aldosterone, since upregulating ENaC is an important action of aldosterone in the kidney. However, in Liddle syndrome ENaC is highly active in the absence of aldosterone. In the salt-expanded state caused by Liddle syndrome, the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone cascade is downregulated or suppressed, resulting in both low plasma renin activity and low serum aldosterone levels.

