Liposarcoma

synonyms:
lipomatous tumor

overview:
Summary
Liposarcoma is a rare tumor derived from fat tissue that occurs in the “soft tissues” of the body (soft tissue sarcoma). It is classified as a cancer (malignant) because of its potential to recur locally and spread to other areas of the body. The severity of disease depends on the subtype of the liposarcoma and the presenting stage of the primary tumor. It can arise in various locations throughout the body, although it is most frequently found in the extremities particularly in the thigh. It can also grow in the back of the abdomen in an area called the “retroperitoneum” where, because of the vast amount of space, can effectively hide a tumor of substantial size and weight. Some individuals with liposarcoma may not have symptoms in the early stages, but as the tumor grows and advances to later stages, it can potentially compress other tissues and cause pain. The specific genetic cause of liposarcoma has yet to be identified, though studies have proposed that it starts in fat cells that have lost their ability to mature or have unregulated growth. It has been found to be more common in middle-aged males from 50 – 65 years of age compared to females and is very rare in children. The mainstay of treatment is surgery or chemotherapy/radiation depending on the staging of the tumor at presentation.

symptoms:
As previously mentioned, most patients who are diagnosed with liposarcoma do not have any early symptoms and it can go unnoticed during the initial stages of the disease until the tumor has grown to a large enough size to compress neighboring tissues and cause pain or decreased function. It can sometimes be noticed as a deep-seated mass to touch. Liposarcoma, as with all other cancers, can present with non-specific symptoms such as fevers, chills, fatigue, night sweats and weight loss. If the tumor is retroperitoneal in location, it can present with specific symptoms in the abdomen, including abdominal or flank pain, swelling, and constipation or the sensation of feeling full sooner than expected after eating.
There are five subtypes of liposarcoma: well differentiated, dedifferentiated, myxoid, round cell and pleomorphic. The well differentiated type is less aggressive and tends to be a large painless mass found in deeper tissues and in the retroperitoneum. Myxoid, round cell and pleomorphic types tend to be in the arms and legs, whereas dedifferentiated tends to be in the retroperitoneum and often associated with the well differentiated variety. Specifically, pleomorphic liposarcoma is the least common subtype with a high rate of recurrence and poor outcomes.

