Listeriosis

synonyms:
listeria infection

overview:
Listeriosis is a rare but serious infectious disease caused by the bacterium Listeria monocytogenes, which is predominantly transmitted to humans through the consumption of contaminated food. Clinical syndromes associated with listeriosis include febrile gastroenteritis, invasive disease (bacteremia, meningitis, meningoencephalitis) and pregnancy-associated infections causing spontaneous abortions, stillbirth, premature labor and neonatal disease. Approximately 20% of listeriosis cases are fatal. Listeriosis most often affects pregnant women and their newborns, adults aged 65 and older and individuals with weakened immune systems. Prompt recognition and treatment of the disease is necessary to avoid several serious complications.

symptoms:
Symptoms associated with listeriosis may vary widely, ranging from mild febrile gastroenteritis to invasive disease (which occurs when the bacteria spread beyond the gastrointestinal tract) causing severe illness. People who are not pregnant most often present with bacteremia (bacteria in the blood), meningitis (infection of the meninges, the membrane surrounding the brain and spinal cord) or meningoencephalitis (infection of the meninges and brain). Common presenting symptoms in patients with bacteremia, meningitis, or meningoencephalitis include fever, muscle aches, headache, stiff neck, malaise, ataxia (loss of balance), convulsions and mental status changes, such as confusion. Less common clinical syndromes include endocarditis (infection of the lining of the heart), pneumonia, osteomyelitis (infection of the bone), septic arthritis (infection of the joint), abscesses of the brain or liver, peritonitis (infection of the membranes lining the abdominal cavity) and endophthalmitis (infection of structures within the eye). Symptoms secondary to these conditions depend on the anatomical site of infection and may include abdominal pain, bone pain, respiratory distress, pneumonia and heart failure. Outbreak investigations have demonstrated that listeriosis can cause febrile gastroenteritis, a noninvasive syndrome, in healthy individuals. Patients with febrile gastroenteritis typically experience diarrhea, fever/chills, fatigue, headache, abdominal pain and nausea.
Listeriosis during pregnancy can result in fetal loss (spontaneous abortion and stillbirth), premature delivery and neonatal bacteremia or meningitis. Listeriosis may occur at any time during pregnancy; however, it is most often detected in the third trimester. Among pregnant women diagnosed with listeriosis, most reported only mild flu-like symptoms including fever, chills, myalgias (muscle aches), headaches, arthralgia (joint pain) and gastrointestinal symptoms. Some pregnant women do not recall having any symptoms before the diagnosis of listeriosis in their infant. In contrast to maternal illness, fetal and newborn infections are serious. Nearly one-quarter of pregnancy-associated cases result in fetal loss or death of the newborn. Infants with listeriosis (neonatal listeriosis) may present with fever, lethargy, irritability, diarrhea, poor feeding, vomiting, respiratory distress or a characteristic skin rash consisting of widely spread, small, pale nodules (granulomatosis infantiseptica). Neonatal listeriosis may be classified as early-onset or late-onset. Early-onset neonatal listeriosis, which occurs in the first 7 days of life, is most often associated with bacteremia or sepsis. Early-onset infections occur following maternal bacteremia with transplacental transmission before birth. Late-onset neonatal listeriosis is most often associated with meningitis. The mode of transmission is less clear in late-onset listeriosis; environmental sources may be involved in some cases, and outbreaks of hospital-acquired, neonatal listeriosis have been reported.

