Locked In Syndrome

synonyms:
cerebromedullospinal disconnectionde-efferented statepseudocoma

overview:
Summary
Locked-in syndrome is a rare neurological disorder in which there is complete paralysis of all voluntary muscles except for the ones that control the movements of the eyes. Individuals with locked-in syndrome are conscious and awake, but have no ability to produce movements (outside of eye movement) or to speak (aphonia). Cognitive function is usually unaffected. Communication is possible through eye movements or blinking. Locked-in syndrome is caused by damaged to the pons, a part of the brainstem that contains nerve fibers that relay information to other areas of the brain.
Introduction
The first description of the locked-in syndrome can be found in The Count of Monte Cristo authored by Alexandre Dumas. To describe a patient with a locked-in syndrome, the author used the following words:
‘Sight and hearing were the only senses remaining…. It was only, however, by means of one of these senses that he could reveal the thoughts and feelings that still occupied his mind, and the look by which he gave expression to his inner life was like the distant gleam of a candle which a traveler sees by night across some desert place, and knows that a living being dwells beyond the silence and obscurity. In his eyes, shaded by thick black lashes, was concentrated, as it often happens with an organ which is used to the exclusion of the others, all the activity, address, force, and intelligence which were formerly diffused over his whole body; and so although the movement of the arm, the sound of the voice, and the agility of the body, were wanting, the speaking eye sufficed for all’.
In this way, he brilliantly highlighted the potential that these patients have to maintain a meaningful life despite their extreme disability.

symptoms:
Individuals with locked-in syndrome classically cannot consciously or voluntarily chew, swallow, breathe, speak, or produce any movements other than those involving the eyes or eyelids. Some affected individuals can move their eyes up and down (vertically), but not side-to-side (horizontally). Affected individuals are bedridden and completely reliant on caregivers. Despite physical paralysis, cognitive function is unaffected.
Individuals with locked-in syndrome are fully alert and aware of their environment. They can hear, see and have preserved sleep-wake cycles. Affected individuals can communicate through purposeful movements of their eyes or blinking or both. They can comprehend people talking or reading to them.
Individuals with locked-in syndrome often initially are comatose before gradually regaining consciousness, but remain paralyzed and unable to speak.
Clinical formsThe locked-in syndrome may be classified in three different clinical forms, according to the traditional classification of Bauer. This classification is based on the amount of motor outputs, which are preserved in the patients. It talks about apure formwhen the patient loses the control of all body movements with the exception of blinking and vertical eye movements; anincomplete formwhen some voluntary movements other than eye movements are preserved and atotal formwhen a complete loss of motor function occurs. The last condition is particularly dramatic as the patients are completely unable to interact with the environment and to express their needs and thoughts.
Quality of lifeAlthough the locked-in syndrome appears as the most dramatic form of motor disability one can imagine, some scientific reports indicate that the quality of life of patients is not so poor as expected. A recent survey investigated the self-reported quality of life of chronic patients with locked-in syndrome and concluded that many patients have a happy and meaningful life, especially when proper social services help patients to have a normal role at home as well as in the community.
Additional symptoms under investigationPatients with locked-in syndrome are traditionally considered cognitively intact as all the cerebral structures with the exception of the ventral portion of the pons of the brain are apparently preserved. However, recent evidence suggests that the patients can develop some non-motor symptoms including motor imagery defects, pathological laughter and crying, and difficulties in the recognition of some facial expressions. The interruption of the cortico-ponto-cerebellar pathways, by means of the the same lesion causing the locked-in syndrome, may be responsible for the appearance of these clinical manifestations. However, these symptoms are not detected in all affected individuals and are currently under further investigation. The recognition of motor imagery defects deserves special attention because these symptoms, whenever present, may interfere with the success of rehabilitation strategies.

