Loeys-Dietz Syndrome

synonyms:
LDS

overview:
Summary

Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is a genetic condition affecting the connective tissue and involving multiple organ systems including the blood vessels, skeleton, eyes and skin. It was first described in 2005 and has many shared characteristics with Marfan syndrome.  While not all individuals have characteristic craniofacial features, individuals with this disorder often have widely spaced eyes, tortuous blood vessels, a uvula that splits in two (bifid uvula) and/or cleft palate.
LDS is an autosomal dominant genetic condition that can be inherited from a parent or occur for the first time in an individual as a result of a new pathogenic variant in one of several genes:GFBR1,TGFBR2,SMAD2,SMAD3,TGFB2andTGFB3.

Introduction

People with LDS are at risk for blood vessel aneurysms, particularly at the root of the aorta, but also in other locations of the arterial tree, that can be life-threatening. Therefore, it is extremely important to screen, diagnose, and prevent complications early.

symptoms:
LDS is a disorder of connective tissue, so it affects the bones, ligaments, arterial walls, and skin most significantly. A patient may not have all of the findings listed here, or maybe just one or two of the findings and still have the disease.
Widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism)Bifid uvula/cleft palateAortic root aneurysmArterial tortuosityScoliosisLong, thin fingers (arachnodactyly)Protruded or caved in chest (pectus carinatum or pectus excavatum)Flat feet (Pes planus)Joint hypermobilityThin, translucent skinClub feetEarly fused skull (craniosynostosis)
During development in the womb and during childhood the eyes may be more noticeable widely set apart than normal, the hard palate may not close completely and/or the skull sutures to close too quickly causing a misshapen head and possibly elevated pressure inside of the skull. In other parts of the body, the chest may be either caved-in (pectus excavatum) or protruded out (pectus carinatum), the joints may be flexible, the fingers/toes may be abnormally long and the spine may be curved.  Sometimes the joints can also become too tight. The eyes and skin are affected as well in some patients, resulting in thin skin. It can be easy to see the veins through the skin as well as excessive bruising.
The artery walls also are prone to expanding/dilating more than they should and once this reaches a certain threshold it is called an aneurysm. These blood vessels may grow abnormally long and twisted or tortuous, making them more likely to split or dissect.  Arteries in the head/neck, where the aorta exits the heart and, in the abdomen, as low as the popliteal area behind the knee have been reported to have aneurysms. These malformed and weakened arteries tend to balloon outwards with high risk of bursting. A ruptured aneurysm is an emergency and can be life-threatening if left untreated. Approximately 2/3 of people with LDS will have an aortic aneurysm at diagnosis and nearly all will have some aortic ballooning.

