Long QT Syndrome

synonyms:
Autosomal Dominant Long QT syndromeLong QT syndrome without deafnessLQTSRomano-Ward Long QT syndromeRWSWard-Romano syndromeRomano-Ward syndrome

overview:
Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is an autosomal dominant disorder, caused by abnormalities of the heart’s electrical conduction system, and is characterized on the electrocardiogram (a test that records the electrical activity of the heart) by prolongation of the QT interval that corresponds to prolongation of the recovery phase or repolarization of the heart muscle (ventricular myocardium) after each heartbeat. QT prolongation predisposes those affected to an increased risk of life threatening sudden alterations in the cardiac rhythm, (termed arrhythmias), specifically torsade de pointes (TdP) or ventricular fibrillation (VF). These arrhythmias can lead to sudden loss of consciousness (syncope), cardiac arrest and potentially cause sudden cardiac death. The severity of cardiac symptoms varies greatly from one person to another, even among family members who carry the same rare genetic variant. Some individuals may have no apparent symptoms (asymptomatic) for their entire lives, whilst others develop arrhythmias resulting in episodes of syncope, and cardiac arrest, at a young age. Several different factors are known to trigger the onset of symptoms including physical activity, excitement and fright, although cardiac events may occur while asleep or at rest.
Long QT syndrome is caused by a disease-causing change (mutation) in one of at least 15 different genes that encode specific ion channels within the cardiomyocyte (heart muscle cell) membranes. These mutations are typically inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, although compound heterozygous (two mutations within one gene), digenic (mutations within two different genes) and homozygous (the same mutation in both copies of a single gene) alleles are all well recognized causes of Long QT syndrome. Individuals with more than one mutation typically have more severe symptoms than those with a single mutation.
Introduction
In 1957, Jervell and Lange-Nielsen described a Norwegian family with 4 of 6 siblings affected by sensorineural deafness, significant QT prolongation and recurrent syncope starting in early childhood, resulting in the sudden death of 3 of the children (1).  Subsequent descriptions of an almost identical condition aside from normal hearing were made in 1963 by Romano (2) and 1964 by Ward (3), who described multiple individuals from two distinct families affected by recurrent ventricular fibrillation, a condition in which the heart’s normal electrical activity becomes disordered resulting in uncoordinated heartbeats and malfunction of the main pumping chambers of the heart (ventricles). Ventricular fibrillation can lead to loss of consciousness during exertion (exertional syncope) and sudden death.  All cases were typified by marked QT prolongation of the surface ECG. These two previously eponymous syndromes (the dominantly inherited Romano Ward and the recessive Jervell Lange-Nielsen) are now recognized as a single clinical entity, long QT syndrome (LQTS)
There are three major types of LTQS; namely LQTS 1, 2 and 3 which correspond to the first three genes and associated proteins (cardiac potassium and sodium channels) identified in the 1990s.  Since then a number of other genes have been implicated, perhaps most notably those associated with calcium handling, although the three initial types remain the most prevalent and best characterized.  Two syndromic LQT variants with varying extracardiac features, previously referred to as long QT 7 and long QT 8, are now referred to as Andersen-Tawil and Timothy syndromes respectively. NORD has individuals reports on these two disorders.

symptoms:
Symptoms, including syncope, can occur at any age from the newborn period to middle age, but most often appear during the pre-teen years through the 20s. Generally, the severity and frequency of episodes decreases during middle age and symptoms are less common after the age of 40 years. Approximately 50% of individuals, who have a mutation in one of the 15 genes that predispose to the disorder, ultimately develop symptoms; the others remain asymptomatic.
Symptoms include palpitations, presyncope and syncope, all of which relate to the onset of a specific ventricular arrhythmia (tachycardia), torsade de pointes.  This is usually self-limiting and will self-terminate in approximately 80% of cases, which explains the recurrent nature of symptoms. However, this may persist leading to ventricular fibrillation with associated cardiac arrest that is fatal unless the patient is treated with a defibrillator to restore normal sinus rhythm.  Tragically the first manifestation of LQTS can be fatal.
Symptoms, such as syncope, may occur without warning and recur unexpectedly. Exertion, excitement or stress may trigger these recurrent symptoms, although they often begin without any precipitating factors. Specific triggers are well recognized and are classically associated with specific subtypes. For example, exercise, especially swimming in LQTS1; exercise, emotional situations, and surprise or sudden noises, particularly when at rest (e.g. alarm clock or phone ringing), in LQTS2; and rest or sleep in LQTS3.
Another important trigger for cardiac events is medication.  A significant number of prescribed agents which can be found at (www.crediblemeds.org) can affect potassium channel function and thereby further prolong the QT interval.  It is important to differentiate between medications unmasking LQTS and true drug-induced QT prolongation, although the latter may also have a genetic basis.
Due to cerebral anoxia (i.e. lack of oxygen delivered to the brain during LQT associated arrhythmia), cardiac events may be mistaken for seizures. The misdiagnosis of LQTS as epilepsy is very well recognized. Therefore, patients with recurrent ‘seizures’ with normal neurological investigations and no response to anti-epileptic medication should have a comprehensive cardiac evaluation.  Interestingly an overlap between LQTS and true epileptic seizures is recognized in a small proportion of patients with long QT2.
The severity and frequency of cardiac events varies depending on numerous individual factors, but specifically the QT interval, age, sex and LQT type.  Ultimately, the QT interval is the best assessment of risk, and patients with severe QT prolongation often present in early childhood with symptomatic arrhythmias. The risk of cardiac events differs between males and females. Males appear to be at greater risk during childhood through puberty, often associated with long QT1. Females with long QT2 have an increased risk relative to males after puberty, after childbirth (postpartum) and after the menopause. The hormonal influences on the QT interval and therefore effective risk are well described; testosterone is typically protective so the QT interval in males shortens post-puberty by 20 milliseconds, whereas in females the balance between estrogen and progesterone is important and thought to underlie the increased rate of events at specific times as detailed above.

