Low Gamma-GT Familial Intrahepatic Cholestasis

synonyms:
benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis types 1 and 2BRIC1BRIC2PFIC1PFIC2PFIC 4PFIC 5PFIC 6progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis types 1 and 2

overview:
Low gamma-GT (GGT) familial intrahepatic cholestasis refers to a spectrum of disease, ranging from mild to severe cases. This spectrum of disease predominantly affects the liver. Advancements in understanding of bile transport physiology have led to the discovery of a variety of protein defects whose dysfunction leads to low GGT familial intrahepatic cholestasis. Children with defects in bile acid synthesis or conjugation, children with abnormalities of cell organization manifest as arthrogryposis-renal dysfunction-cholestasis syndrome, and children with “neonatal hemochromatosis” all may have low GGT familial intrahepatic cholestasis. These disorders are not covered in this report.
This report primarily covers the two severe forms of low GGT familial intrahepatic cholestasis that have been classically described (PFIC1 aka FIC1 deficiency; and PFIC2 aka BSEP deficiency). Two milder forms, known as benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis (BRIC) 1 and 2 are also described. These less severe diseases result from defects in the same proteins which cause PFIC 1 and 2. Thus PFIC and BRIC lie at different ends of a spectrum of disease with common genetic basis. Newer forms of genetic based disorders which manifest as low GGT cholestasis (PFIC 4-6) will be presented in less detail given the relatively few patients known to be affected by these disorders. Some persons with low GGT familial intrahepatic cholestasis cannot be shown to have any of the disorders mentioned in this report. The search continues for causes for these persons’ illness or illnesses.
The main symptom of this spectrum of disease is interruption or suppression of the flow of bile from the liver (cholestasis). Cholestasis in these disorders occurs due to defects within the liver (intrahepatic) rather than within the bile ducts outside the liver (extrahepatic). Features of cholestasis may include yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes and whites of the eyes (jaundice), failure to thrive, growth deficiency, easy bleeding, rickets, and persistent, severe itchiness (pruritus). In many cases, symptoms or signs are present at birth or during the newborn period. The more severe forms of these disorders eventually progress to cause life-threatening complications such as scarring of the liver (cirrhosis) and liver failure.
PFIC1 and BRIC1 are caused by mutations in a gene namedATP8B1.ATP8B1encodes a protein named familial intrahepatic cholestasis 1 (FIC1). PFIC2 and BRIC2 are caused by mutations in a gene namedABCB11.ABCB11encodes a protein named bile salt export pump (BSEP). Recently, additional proteins have been identified in whom mutations result in a phenotypic pattern that is similar to PFIC 1 and 2, mainly cholestasis presenting in the neonatal period. PFIC4 stems from loss of function mutations in TJP2 encoding the tight junction proteinTJP2. PFIC5 results from mutations inNR1H4, which encodes the farnesoid X receptor (FXR), the nuclear receptor transcription factor which regulates BSEP expression. PFIC6 results in defects inMYO5B, on which BSEP depends to localize to the appropriate location within the cell. All forms of PFIC are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Some affected individuals do not have mutations in any of these genes, suggesting that additional, as of yet unidentified, forms of these disorders may exist.
These disorders have normal or low serum levels of an enzyme known as gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) and, therefore, may be collectively known as low GGT familial intrahepatic cholestasis. Most children with severe cholestasis have elevated levels of this enzyme, enabling physicians to distinguish these disorders from other causes of cholestasis.
Researchers have also identified a disorder known as PFIC type 3 or multidrug resistance protein 3 (MDR3) deficiency. Although this disorder is often grouped with PFIC disorders, it is associated with high levels of GGT enzyme activity and the underlying defects causing this disorder are different. MDR3 deficiency is not covered in this report.
The classification of these disorders is complicated and has continually changed as more about these disorders has become known. Various names have been used for these disorders such as FIC1 deficiency and Byler’s Syndrome for PFIC1; and BSEP deficiency and Byler’s disease for PFIC2, adding to the confusion. The classification and grouping of these disorders may undergo further changes in the future as more becomes known about the genetic underpinnings driving disease development.

symptoms:
The age of onset, severity and specific symptoms of low GGT familial intrahepatic cholestasis may vary from one individual to another, even among members of the same family. Although these disorders are generally described as being either mild or severe, cases have been identified that appear to fall in between these extremes (intermediate types), leading researchers to classify these disorders as a spectrum of disease. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals or parents of affected children should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
PROGRESSIVE FAMILIAL INTRAHEPATIC CHOLESTASISThe symptoms of PFIC types 1 and 2 are extremely similar. Symptoms are often present at birth or during the first few months of life (congenital). Progression may vary dramatically. Some individuals may develop severe symptoms early during infancy; others may not develop symptoms until later in childhood.
The major finding associated with all forms of PFIC is interruption or suppression of the flow of bile from the liver (cholestasis). This interruption or suppression usually begins during the first few months of life. Affected infants have episodes of cholestasis followed by disease-free periods. However, eventually cholestasis progresses to become a persistent condition.
The formation of bile is one of the functions of the liver. Bile is a fluid that contains water, certain minerals that carry an electric charge (electrolytes), and other materials including bile salts, phospholipids, cholesterol, and an orange-yellow pigment (bilirubin) that is a byproduct of the natural breakdown of the hemoglobin of red blood cells. Bile flow accomplishes two important tasks within the body: it aids in digestion and absorption of dietary fats, vitamins, and other nutrients and it aids in the elimination of excess cholesterol, bilirubin, waste, and toxins from the body. Therefore, a problem with normal bile flow often results in malabsorption of vital nutrients and the accumulation of toxic materials in the body.
The initial symptoms associated with PFIC may be foul smelling, greasy stools or watery diarrhea, which are often present at birth (congenital). Affected infants may also experience intense, often persistent, itching (pruritus). Itching can cause irritability and skin abrasions due to constant scratching. Itching can be resistant to treatment and have tremendously adverse effects on children and their families. Itching may occur with or without excessive bilirubin in the body (hyperbilirubinemia), resulting in yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes and whites of the eyes (jaundice). Initially, jaundice may come and go, but eventually it may continually persist. Additional symptoms common to liver disease such as an abnormally large liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly) may also occur.
Another common finding associated with PFIC is impairment of the ability of the digestive system properly to absorb fat, vitamins and other nutrients (malabsorption). Malabsorption leads to vitamin deficiency and eventually results in failure to thrive, growth deficiency, bleeding episodes such as repeated nosebleeds, an abnormal susceptibility to bruising, and rickets. Rickets is a bone disorder with characteristic growth plate abnormalities and progressive softening of the bone structure. As a result, many children may be small for their age (short stature).
PFIC types 1 and 2 eventually progress to cause serious life-threatening complications including the formation of fibrous tissue (fibrosis) and liver regeneration with scarring (cirrhosis) in the liver, eventually resulting in liver failure. Without intervention, these complications may develop by the end of the first decade of life.
Additional symptoms have been reported in some cases including repeated infections, hearing impairment due to abnormalities of the inner ear (sensorineural deafness), profound diarrhea, and pancreatitis. These extrahepatic, or outside the liver, manifestations of disease are more commonly reported in individuals with PFIC1 as the FIC1 protein is expressed in many tissues throughout the body. This is in contrast to BSEP protein which is exclusive to the liver cell. Notably, the extrahepatic manifestations of PFIC1 can persist, or even worsen after liver transplant. In addition, PFIC1 after liver transplant may be associated with abnormal fat accumulation and associated inflammation within the liver (steatohepatitis). PFIC2 after liver transplant sometimes returns; this has been traced to formation of antibodies against BSEP that block BSEP function.
BENIGN RECURRENT INTRAHEPATIC CHOLESTASISThe milder forms of low GGT familial intrahepatic cholestasis are known as benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis (BRIC) types 1 and 2. Onset of BRIC can be at any age, but in most cases occurs during the first decade.Affected individuals have prolonged recurrent attacks of cholestasis lasting from a few weeks to several months. The stimulus that brings on an attack is usually unclear. Generally, cholestasis associated with BRIC types 1 and 2 is self-limiting and not progressive. Chronic liver damage does not develop. Months or years may separate attacks of cholestasis. Symptoms usually begin in childhood or adolescence and may occur with regularity. Attacks typically begin with tiredness, weakness, and loss of appetite. Intense itchiness and yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes and whites of the eye may follow. The liver may be enlarged. Excessive fat in the feces and unintended weight loss may also occur. Affected individuals may experience impaired absorption of essential vitamins and nutrients in the digestive system (malabsorption). Hearing loss may occur in patients with BRIC1. In some cases, individuals with mild symptoms during childhood (BRIC) may develop more serious complications as an adult, with their condition being better classified as PFIC.
INTRAHEPATIC CHOLESTASIS OF PREGNANCYSome females with mutations in the genes that cause low GGT familial intrahepatic cholestasis may develop a condition known as intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP). This condition is characterized by cholestasis, itching and, in some cases, jaundice that develops during pregnancy, usually during the third trimester. The symptoms resolve without treatment (spontaneously) after the pregnancy (postpartum). Generally, females who develop ICP do not exhibit symptoms before pregnancy and do not develop chronic liver damage. Some females with ICP also are sensitive to hormonal contraceptive agents. Contraceptive-associated intrahepatic cholestasis and ICP can be viewed as forms of BRIC in which the stimulus to an attack is known.

