Lymphocytic Infiltrate of Jessner

synonyms:
benign lymphocytic infiltrate of the skinJessner-Kanof lymphocytic infiltrationbenign lymphocytic infiltrationJessner diseaseJessner-Kanof syndromebenign chronic T-cell infiltrative disease

overview:
Summary

Lymphocytic infiltrate of Jessner is a rare skin condition that may be characterized by non-cancerous (benign) buildup of white blood cells, which present as lesions or lumps on the skin. These lesions may be seen on areas including the face, neck, upper extremities, shoulders, and upper back (skin most exposed to sunlight). They may be described as small, non-scaly in nature, and pink/red in color. Although the lesions are typically not painful, patients with lymphocytic infiltrate of Jessner may experience itchiness and redness. Presentation can vary, for example, the lesions may remain unchanged for several years and resolve. Other patients may go through worsening of symptoms for years.

Introduction

Lymphocytic infiltrate of Jessner has been thought to fall in the same spectrum as the autoimmune disease known as lupus tumidus or discoid lupus erythematosus. However, other scientists believe that lymphocytic infiltrate of Jessner should be designated its own category.

symptoms:
Patients living with lymphocytic infiltrate of Jessner may experience symptoms including itchiness  (pruritus), redness of the skin (erythema), and pimple-like eruptions (papules), most commonly on areas exposed to sunlight. These pimple-like lesions may last up to several months. As they extend from the perimeter, these lesions form well-defined, smooth, red patches (plaques) whose diameter may go as far as up to one inch.
Occasionally, clear centers will form on the plaques. The skin surrounding the lesions may be reddened or itching. Those affected may also experience a burning sensation surrounding the skin lesions. An additional symptom that people with Jessner disease frequently report is sensitivity of the skin to sunlight exposure cutaneous photosensitivity.
The course of lymphocytic Infiltrate of Jessner varies from person to person. It is important to note that the symptoms typically disappear after several years but it is also possible that they may reappear later. The course or progression of the disease may alternate between periods of worsening and relieving of symptoms. These periods may last up to months or even years in some individuals.

