Lymphomatoid Granulomatosis

synonyms:
benign lymph angiitis and granulomatosismalignant lymph angiitis and granulomatosispulmonary angiitis

overview:
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis is a rare disorder characterized by overproduction (proliferation) of white blood cells called lymphocytes (lymphoproliferative disorder). The abnormal cells infiltrate and accumulate (form lesions or nodules) within tissues. The lesions or nodules damage or destroy the blood vessels within these tissues. The lungs are most commonly affected in lymphomatoid granulomatosis. Symptoms often include cough, shortness of breath (dyspnea) and chest tightness. Other areas of the body such as the skin, central nervous system, kidneys and liver are also frequently affected.
The abnormal cells in lymphomatoid granulomatosis are B-cells (B lymphocytes) containing the Epstein-Barr virus. There are two main types of lymphocytes: B-lymphocytes, which may produce specific antibodies to “neutralize” certain invading microorganisms, and T-lymphocytes, which may directly destroy microorganisms or assist in the activities of other lymphocytes. Because lymphomatoid granulomatosis is caused by the growth of abnormal B-cells, affected individuals may eventually develop B-cell lymphoma, a form of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Lymphoma is a general term for cancer of the lymphatic system.

symptoms:
The symptoms and progression of lymphomatoid granulomatosis vary greatly from person to person. The disorder may occasionally resolve without treatment (spontaneous remission) in some affected individuals or more commonly it will progress and cause life-threatening complications. Occasionally, it is an incidental and asymptomatic finding on chest radiographs.
In almost all affected individuals, lymphomatoid granulomatosis affects the lungs and often causes a cough, shortness of breath (dyspnea) and/or chest tightness. In most patients, the cough is non-productive and is rarely associated with blood (hemoptysis). Systemic symptoms are not uncommon and may include fever, a general feeling of poor health (malaise), weight loss, and fatigue.
Approximately one-third of affect individuals will develop skin lesions such as a patchy reddish (erythematous) rash consisting of flat discolored lesions (macules), small, elevated bumps (papules) or, more rarely, solid, raised, flat-topped lesions (plaques). Small bumps or growths (nodules) just below the surface of the skin (subcutaneous) may also develop. Larger nodules may become open sores (ulcerated).
In approximately one-third of patients, the central nervous may be involved potentially resulting in mental status changes, headaches, seizures, paralysis of one side of the body (hemiparesis), or loss of the ability to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia).
Less commonly, the kidneys or liver may be involved, although this rarely leads to the development of symptoms. In some cases the liver may become enlarged (hepatomegaly). In some extremely rare cases, lymphomatoid granulomatosis may only affect the skin or only the central nervous system (isolated lymphomatoid granulomatosis).
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis may eventually progress to a form of large B-cell lymphoma.

