Lymphedema-Distichiasis Syndrome

synonyms:
lymphedema with distichiasis

overview:
Lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome is a rare genetic multisystem disorder characterized by swelling of the legs because of fluid accumulation and the development of extra eyelashes (distichiasis). Distichiasis may range from a few extra lashes to a full set of extra eyelashes. Swelling most often affects both legs (bilateral) and usually occurs around puberty. Additional anomalies sometimes associated with this disorder include early onset varicose veins, droopy eyelids (ptosis), heart defects, cleft palate, abnormal heart rhythm and abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis). Lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome is caused by changes (pathogenic variants) of theFOXC2gene and is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.

symptoms:
The symptoms of lymphedema-distichiasis vary greatly from person to person even among members of the same family. The most common finding is the extra row of eyelashes (distichiasis). Most patients also develop swelling (edema) or puffiness of the legs because of the accumulation of protein-rich fluid (lymph) in the soft layers of tissue under the skin.
The severity of lymphedema (swelling due to the accumulation of lymph fluid) varies, but usually involves only the legs. In most people, both legs are affected (bilateral). In some people, swelling may cause tightness, discomfort and unusual tingling sensations (paresthesias) in the affected areas. Typically, lymphedema develops around puberty, although it can develop as early as before the person is born or in adulthood.
Males develop lymphedema at an earlier age than females and are more likely to develop cellulitis. Cellulitis is an infection that is often associated with lymphedema. Cellulitis is characterized by swollen, reddened skin that may feel warm and tender.
Distichiasis may range from a few extra lashes to a full set of extra eyelashes. This can be very hard to see and is often missed by routine examination. Associated eye abnormalities may occur including an abnormal sensitivity to light (photophobia), inflammation of the delicate membrane that lines the inside of the eyelids (conjunctivitis), irritation of the curved transparent outer layer of fibrous tissue covering the eyeball (cornea) and the development of a small tender bump on the eyelid (stye). Drooping or sagging of the eyelids (ptosis) may also occur.
Many individuals with lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome develop varicose veins, a condition marked by twisted, widened and enlarged veins just below the surface of the skin. In some people, varicose veins may precede the development of lymphedema. In individuals with lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome, varicose veins develop at a much younger age and with greater frequency than in the general population.
Congenital heart disease has been reported in some individuals with lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome, especially a condition known as tetralogy of Fallot. Tetralogy of Fallot consists of a combination of four different heart defects: a ventricular septal defect; obstructed outflow of blood from the right ventricle to the lungs (pulmonary stenosis); a displaced aorta, which causes blood to flow into the aorta from both the right and left ventricles; and the abnormal enlargement of the right ventricle. This combination of abnormalities typically leads to poor blood flow to the lungs and poor blood oxygenation. The symptoms tend to worsen with time if this remains untreated and can be life-threatening.
In some patients, irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias) may develop.
Rarely, additional abnormalities have been reported to occur in association with lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome including crossed eyes (strabismus), incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate), side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis), webbing of the neck, and cysts on the outermost layer of the membranes (meninges) that cover the spinal cord (spinal extradural cysts). Very rarely, patients may have total body swelling prior to birth (hydrops fetalis). Also very rarely, patients may have breathing problems due to abnormal lymph flow in their lungs.

