Lymphatic Malformations

synonyms:
cavernous lymphangiomacystic hygromacystic lymphangiomalymphangiomalymphangioma circumscriptumlymphangiomatosismacrocystic lymphatic malformationmicrocystic lymphatic malformation

overview:
Summary
Lymphatic malformations are rare, non-malignant masses consisting of fluid-filled channels or spaces thought to be caused by the abnormal development of the lymphatic system. These malformations are usually apparent at birth or by two years of age. Lymphatic malformations can affect any area of the body (except the brain), but most commonly affect the head and neck. When evident at birth (congenital), lymphatic malformations tend to be soft, spongy, non-tender masses. The specific symptoms and severity of lymphatic malformations varies based upon the size and specific location of the malformation. Some lymphatic malformations can be massive. Lymphatic malformations, regardless of size, can potentially cause functional impairment of nearby structures or organs and disfigurement of affected areas.
Introduction
The lymphatic system functions as part of the immune system and helps to protect the body against infection and disease. It consists of a network of tubular channels (lymph vessels) that transport a thin watery fluid known as lymph from different areas of the body into the bloodstream. Lymph accumulates between tissue cells and contains proteins, fats and certain white blood cells known as lymphocytes. As lymph moves through the lymphatic system, it passes through a network of lymph nodes that help the body remove sources of infection (e.g., viruses, bacteria, etc.) and inflammation (e.g. antigens). Groups of lymph nodes are located throughout the body, including in the neck, under the arms (axillae), at the elbows and in the chest, abdomen and groin. The lymphatic system also includes the spleen, which filters worn-out red blood cells and produces lymphocytes and bone marrow, which is the spongy tissue inside the cavities of bones that manufactures blood cells.
Several different terms were once used to describe conditions now grouped under the umbrella term “lymphatic malformations.” Such terms include cystic hygroma, lymphangioma, cavernous lymphangioma, cystic lymphangioma and lymphangioma circumscriptum. These terms have been abandoned because some of the outdated terms imply a relationship to cancer. Lymphatic malformations are not cancerous and there is no known risk of malignant transformation.

symptoms:
Generally, symptoms from lymphatic malformations arise from compression or obstruction of nearby structures. Lymphatic malformations can involve any tissue. Usually they are found in only one area of the body (localized), but occasionally can be widespread (diffuse). When lymphatic malformations are widespread in bone and soft tissue, the condition may be referred to as lymphangiomatosis. Lymphatic malformations usually slowly grow larger as the patient grows, but sometimes get smaller spontaneously. Certain events such as puberty, infection, trauma or bleeding into a lymphatic malformation can cause them to grow rapidly.
It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below and that one child’s experience can vary dramatically from another child’s experience. Parents of affected children should talk to their physician and medical team about their child’s specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis. The specific symptoms that develop depend upon the size and exact location of a lymphatic malformation.
Lymphatic malformations are associated with overgrowth (hypertrophy) and swelling of any affected area including the lips, tongue, jaws, cheeks, arms, legs, fingers or toes. Malformations affecting the tongue, windpipe (trachea) or mouth can cause difficulty breathing (dyspnea), difficulties with speech and difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) and feeding problems. If the eye socket (orbit) is involved, double vision (diplopia) or displacement of the eyeball can occur (proptosis). Lymphatic malformations affecting the chest can cause wheezing, chest pain, chest pressure, shortness of breath, difficulty breathing and potentially airway compromise. Lymphatic malformations affecting the gastrointestinal tract or pelvis can cause constipation, bladder obstruction, recurrent infection or protein loss. Lesions in bone can be associated with bone overgrowth or bone loss.
Certain complications can occur with lymphatic malformations including recurrent inflammation or bleeding (hemorrhaging) into the malformation. When lymphatic malformations become inflamed, they swell, and the skin in the involved area becomes red and warm. This is known as cellulitis. Recurrent cellulitis can cause pain and disfigurement of the affected area. Some patients with lymphatic malformation have abnormally low numbers of lymphocytes which make them prone to cellulitis. Bleeding into a lymphatic malformation can cause rapid pain, hardening, and swelling or enlargement of the malformation in the affected area.
Radiographically lymphatic malformations have been categorized into three subtypes – macrocystic, microcystic or mixed (a combination of the other two). Macrocystic and microcystic lymphatic malformations are differentiated by the size of the fluid-containing portion of the malformation. The macrocystic type is made up of large cysts, more than 2 centimeters in diameter; the microcystic type is made up of smaller cysts or soft tissue enlargement without cyst formation. Most lymphatic malformations have both macrocystic and microcystic portions and histologically there is no difference between these categories. Macrocystic lymphatic malformations are characterized by a single or multiple fluid-filled pockets or cysts that occur most commonly in the nape of the neck. Macrocystic lymphatic malformations generally form soft, large translucent masses that can involve any area of the neck or chest. Overlying skin may have a bluish tinge. Although macrocystic lymphatic malformations typically appear on the back of the neck, they can, less frequently, originate near the armpits (axilla), in the groin, in the rear of the abdominal cavity, in the chest wall or in the hip or tailbone region. Macrocystic lymphatic malformations can potentially be extremely large, even large enough to obstruct the airway at delivery.
Microcystic lymphatic malformations may appear as several small, raised sacs (vesicles) on the skin that contain clear or bloody (hemorrhagic) fluid. They generally grow slowly usually in proportion with a growing child. Microcystic lymphatic malformations can thicken or swell causing enlargement of surrounding soft tissue and bones. They can be found on any area of skin or mucous membrane.

