Lymphangioleiomyomatosis

synonyms:
LAMlymphangioleimyomatosislymphangioleiomatosislymphangiomyomatosispulmonary lymphangiomyomatosissporadic lymphangioleiomyomatosis

overview:
Summary
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is a rare progressive multisystem disorder that predominantly impacts women of reproductive age. It is estimated to affect 3.4-7.8/1,000,000 women worldwide. There are two main types of LAM: sporadic LAM (that occurs spontaneously) and LAM associated with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC), an inheritable genetic condition. LAM is characterized by the spread and uncontrolled growth (proliferation) of specialized cells (smooth muscle-like LAM cells) in certain organs of the body, especially the lungs, kidneys and lymphatics. The most common symptom associated with LAM is difficulty breathing (dyspnea), especially on exertion. Affected individuals may also experience complications including lung collapse (pneumothorax) or fluid accumulation around the lungs (pleural effusion) and in the abdomen, and benign kidney tumors called angiomyolipomas. The disorder is progressive and, in some patients, may result in chronic respiratory failure. Fortunately, treatment with sirolimus allows for a slower progression of disease and better management of complications. Further research leading to better understanding of this rare disease promises improved therapeutic options in the future.

symptoms:
The symptoms of LAM vary depending on the organs affected.
The abnormal LAM cells infiltrate tissues, form cysts and obstruct the affected airways (breathing tubes), blood vessels and lymphatic vessels. Consequently, pulmonary LAM can present with shortness of breath upon exertion, cough, wheezing and chest pain. Sometimes, individuals may cough up small amounts of blood (hemoptysis) and have bleeding in their lungs (pulmonary hemorrhage) due to obstructed blood vessels. Infiltration of the lung with LAM cells results in progressive breathing difficulties, lung collapse and interference with the lung’s ability to deliver oxygen to the rest of the body.
About 50-60% of individuals with LAM experience a lung collapse (pneumothorax) at some point in their life. In about one third of these patients, the pneumothorax may be the first manifestation that brings the diagnosis of LAM to light. The symptoms of a collapsed lung may include sudden, sharp chest pain, difficult, rapid breathing (tachypnea), rapid heartbeat (tachycardia), low blood pressure (hypotension), profuse sweating (diaphoresis), dizziness and/or lack of normal chest movement on the affected side of the chest. This complication tends to recur in LAM, therefore management with a medicine or surgical technique that adheres lungs to the chest wall (pleurodesis) is recommended.
About 10 to 30% of people with LAM experience fluid (e.g. chyle) accumulation in the chest cavity around the lungs (pleural effusion). Chyle is a fat-laden cloudy fluid that is absorbed during digestion by the lymphatic vessels located around the intestine. Chyle normally flows through lymphatic vessels into the upper chest (thoracic duct) and is then deposited into veins, where it mixes with blood. In some people with LAM, the lymphatic vessels may rupture or become blocked (obstructed) due to the infiltration of LAM cells, causing chyle to accumulate in the chest cavity (chylothorax). In some patients, chyle may accumulate in the abdomen causing an increase in girth, a condition called chylous ascites. Involvement of the axial lymphatics may also lead to formation of chyle-filled lymphatic cysts called lymphangioleiomyomas within the chest and abdomen.
Approximately 30% of individuals with sporadic LAM and up to 80% of individuals with TSC-LAM develop angiomyolipomas, which are benign tumors made up of fat, blood vessels and smooth muscle-like cells. These tumors most commonly affect the kidneys and often do not cause symptoms. In some patients, they may cause flank pain, blood in the urine (hematuria) or bleeding into the abdomen.
Symptoms of LAM may become progressively worse as LAM cell proliferation continues and may result in chronic life-threatening respiratory failure.

