Lysosomal Free Sialic Acid Storage Disorders

overview:
Summary
Free sialic acid storage disorder (FSASD) is a rare neurodegenerative, multisystem disorder characterized by abnormal accumulation of free sialic acid (a sugar molecule) in various tissues and organs of the body. FSASD occurs because of changes (variants) in theSLC17A5gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern meaning each parent passes down one variant to the affected child. FSASD comprises a spectrum of disease severity, historically divided into three subtypes, ranging from the most severe form (also called infantile free sialic acid storage disorder (ISSD)), often lethal in utero or in early childhood, to an intermediate severe form, to the mildest, slowly progressive form (also called Salla disease) with patients living into adulthood. The specific symptoms associated with these subtypes can vary greatly. All subtypes are associated with some degree of degeneration of nerve cells (neurodegeneration) and cognitive impairment.

Introduction
FSASD belongs to a larger group of diseases known as lysosomal storage disorders. Lysosomes are membrane-bound compartments within cells. They contain enzymes that break down large molecules such as proteins, carbohydrates and fats into their building blocks.
The protein SLC17A5, also called sialin, transports sialic acid out of lysosomes. Low levels or inactivity of SLC17A5 leads to abnormal accumulation (storage) of free sialic acid inside the lysosomes of tissues and organs of individuals affected with FSASD. Sialic acid is a charged sugar involved in various biological processes, including cellular recognition, cell-cell attachment and cell signaling. Abnormal sialic acid levels in tissues and organs likely contribute to the symptoms of individuals with FSASD. Like some other lysosomal storage diseases, the spectrum of FSASD disease severity correlates with the severity of the genetic variants (e.g., variants in theSLC17A5gene in FSASD) and the amount of stored material (e.g., free sialic acid in FSASD) in lysosomes.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of FSASD are highly variable. Some individuals will develop severe, life-threatening complications; others will have milder findings. The more severely affected patients usually exhibit symptoms within six months of birth or even before birth; milder cases may become apparent later during infancy or childhood. Affected individuals may not have all the symptoms discussed below.

Severe FSASD
Symptoms of severe FSASD (also called infantile sialic acid storage disorder, ISSD) are usually apparent at birth or early in infancy; some infants may be born prematurely or die in the womb. Affected infants may have fluid accumulation in the abdominal cavity (ascites), abnormal enlargement of the liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly) and coarse facial features. Some infants have diminished muscle tone (hypotonia) and may be referred to as “floppy babies”.
Affected infants may also fail to gain weight and grow at the normal rate for age and sex (failure to thrive), may experience significant delays in attaining developmental milestones (developmental delays) or may lose milestones that have been previously acquired. Cognitive deficits and seizures may occur.
Skeletal abnormalities in infants with severe FSASD can include malformation (dysplasia) near the ends of the long bones (metaphyses), clubbed feet, abnormally short thigh bones (femurs), malformation (dysplasia) of the hip and underdevelopment of certain bones of the fingers and toes (phalanges).
Severe FSASD eventually progresses to cause life-threatening complications such as serious respiratory infections and abnormal enlargement of the heart (cardiomegaly). Some infants develop nephrotic syndrome, in which damage to the kidneys causes them to leak large quantities of protein into the urine. Nephrotic syndrome can cause swelling in the arms and legs, around the eyes or in other areas due to fluid accumulation (edema). Additional symptoms may include a swollen abdomen, unintended weight gain and high blood pressure. Most individuals with severe FSASD die in early childhood.

Mild FSASD
Mild FSASD (also called Salla disease) is the least severe form of the disorder. The specific symptoms and severity can vary from one individual to another. Although Salla disease can cause life-threatening complications, some individuals have lived into their 70s. Affected infants appear normal at birth but may develop symptoms during the first year of life. Such symptoms include diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), rapid, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus) and difficulty coordinating voluntary movements (ataxia). Affected infants often exhibit delays in reaching developmental milestones (developmental delays) such as sitting, walking or talking.
Approximately two-thirds of children with mild FSASD eventually learn to walk. Some degree of speech impairment is usually present. Affected infants may learn single words or small sentences, but this ability may be lost as they age. The ability to speak is affected more severely than the ability to understand speech. Affected children exhibit some degree of cognitive impairment as well.
Some individuals with mild FSASD may not develop symptoms until later in childhood when a variety of neurological findings become apparent. These include seizures, involuntary muscles spasms that result in slow, stiff movements of the legs (spasticity) and repetitive, involuntary, writhing movements of the arms and legs (athetosis). Some individuals who previously developed the ability to walk or talk may lose these skills (regression). Some individuals may experience a gradual coarsening of facial features.

Intermediate FSASD
The severity of intermediate FSASD can vary greatly from one individual to another. Only a handful of people with intermediate lysosomal free sialic acid storage disease have been reported in the medical literature. The symptoms are similar to those of the mild and severe forms of the disease, but less severe than severe FSASD and more severe than mild FSASD.

