Madelung’s Disease

synonyms:
benign symmetrical lipomatosis (BSL)cephalothoracic lipodystrophylaunois-bensaude syndromemultiple symmetric lipomatosis (MSL)

overview:
Summary
Madelung’s disease is a rare disorder of fat metabolism (lipid storage) that results in an unusual accumulation of subcutaneous fat (adipose tissue) deposits around the neck, shoulders, trunk, hips, upper arms and thighs. The fat masses can progress quickly over months or slowly over years. Face and legs are usually spared in this benign condition, and biochemical parameters can also remain within normal limits. Madelung’s disease can be mistaken for obesity due to the symmetrical deposition of fat. Although painless, the fatty tumors can affect the function of other structures in the affected area causing patients to have symptoms such as difficulty swallowing, speaking and breathing.
Adult males between ages 30-70 with a history of excessive drinking (chronic alcoholism) are most often affected, although females and people who do not drink alcohol can also get Madelung’s disease. This condition is more common in Mediterranean and European populations, and less frequent in Asian populations. The underlying causes of this condition aren’t fully understood, which can lead to limitations in treatment options. Scientists have suggested that a dysregulation in the fat breakdown (lipolytic) pathway could be the cause of the excessive growth and division of fat cells (adipocytes). Familial cases with an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern have also been noted. Currently, surgical removal of the fatty tumors through resection (lipectomy) or liposuction is the primary treatment. Unfortunately, the effectiveness of current treatment options is limited as the disease has a high tendency to reoccur.
Introduction
Madelung’s disease was first described by Benjamin Brodie in 1846, and then later as ‘fat neck’ (Fetthals) by Otto Madelung in 1888.

symptoms:
Madelung’s disease is characterized by the presence of fatty tumors (lipomas) located symmetrically around the neck, shoulders, trunk, hips, upper arms and thighs. While these abnormal fatty tumors may grow over the course of months to years, the disease usually has a rapid progression at first and then slows down as the size of the fatty mass stabilizes. The rest of the body may be lean in contrast to the affected parts.
In 1984, Enzi classified two types of Madelung’s disease – type 1 and 2 – based on where the excess fat accumulated. The more frequent type 1 is common in males and manifests as fatty tumors primarily around the neck (known as ‘Madelung’s collar’) and upper shoulders with relative sparing of the trunk and arms. As a result, type 1 patients have a ‘pseudo-athletic’ appearance. In contrast, type 2 is observed in both males and females equally and resembles ‘generalized obesity’ as the fatty deposition occurs in the trunk, upper portion of arms, abdomen, hips and upper thighs. In 1991, type 3 (gynecoid type) was added to the classification and is characterized by fat accumulation primarily in the pelvic region.
Peripheral neuropathy, or impaired function of the nerves in the arms and legs, often accompanies Madelung’s disease, especially as the affected person grows older. However, these neurological deficits may be difficult to distinguish from the long-term effects of alcoholism when overuse of alcohol is a factor. Nevertheless, peripheral neuropathy may lead to decreased power in the muscles of the upper (proximal) portion of the arms and legs (myopathy). Symptoms can also arise from the fatty masses compressing important structures in the neck such as the airway (trachea), voice box (larynx), esophagus and carotid blood vessels. Depending on the severity of the disease, the fatty tumors may cause patients to have trouble breathing (dyspnea), swallowing (dysphagia) and speaking (dysphonia). The patient can present with limited mobility of the neck and may even develop sleep apnea as the disease progresses. It is important to note that the physical changes in a patient’s body resulting from the excessive fatty deposition can take a toll on the patient’s mental health and lead to depression. Social loss and difficulty performing or maintaining a job due to impaired mobility and other issues have been reported in patients.
There are metabolic abnormalities and other conditions usually associated with Madelung’s disease. These include diabetes mellitus, hypertension and liver disease. Most patients (~90%) diagnosed with Madelung’s disease have secondary (alcohol-induced) liver cirrhosis. Although rare, some patients have had malignant transformation and association of the disease with airway and digestive tract cancers.

