Maffucci Syndrome

overview:
Maffucci syndrome is an extremely rare disorder characterized by benign cartilage overgrowths (enchondromas), skeletal deformities and cutaneous lesions composed of abnormal blood vessels. Enchondromas arise in bones, most frequently in the hands and feet, and less often in the legs and long bones of the arm.

symptoms:
Maffucci syndrome is not recognizable at birth. Lesions usually develop early in childhood, most often between 1-5 years of age. The severity of the disorder is variable. Some patients have a very benign course, whereas others develop serious complications.
The first sign of Maffucci syndrome is usually finding an enchondroma in a long bone. Enchondromas distort and weaken the affected bones, thus initial presentation with a pathologic fracture is common. These cartilaginous tumors cause bulging of the bones, bowing of the arms and legs, and often disproportionate (asymmetric) growth (different lengths of the arms or legs). The patient may exhibit short stature in adulthood. Enchondromas affect only one side of the body in approximately 40 percent of patients.
Vascular lesions on the skin also usually appear in early childhood (around 4-5 years of age) and often are progressive. These lesions do not necessarily occur near the bones that have enchondromas. Cutaneous vascular lesions begin as compressible, round, bluish spots. In time, they become firm, knotty, warty, and often form calcium stones (phleboliths). The hand is the most common location; however vascular lesions can also occur in internal structures, such as the membranes that cover the brain and spinal cord (meninges), the tongue and the oral mucosa.
The vascular lesions used to be called “cavernous hemangiomas”. Microscopic studies have shown that they are comprised of abnormally formed veins; the modern term is “venous malformation.” A benign vascular tumor, designated as “spindle cell hemangioma,” often arises in these malformed veins.
Patients with Maffucci syndrome are at risk to developing a malignant tumor, particularly a tumor of cartilage known as “chondrosarcoma.” The more enchondromas, the higher the risk of malignancy. The frequency of tumors has been estimated to be between 15-40 %, however, some researchers think chondrosarcoma in Maffucci syndrome is over-reported. Less frequently, other malignant non-skeletal connective tissue neoplasms occur in patients with Maffucci syndrome.

