Malan Syndrome

overview:
Summary
Malan syndrome is a rare genetic disorder that belongs to a larger group of disorders known as overgrowth syndromes. In general, overgrowth syndromes are characterized by a faster rate of growth before or after birth and can occur in any part of the body including bone, skin, muscles and organs. Malan syndrome is caused by genetic changes (pathogenic variants) in theNFIXgene. The age of onset is typically in infancy. Characteristics of this disorder include mild to moderate overgrowth in height at an early age, large head size (macrocephaly), weak muscles (hypotonia), intellectual disability, speech delay, motor delay, vision problems, brain abnormalities seen on MRI, breastbone abnormalities, curvature of the spine (scoliosis), seizures, autistic-like traits and mental health concerns such as anxiety. Less commonly, individuals with Malan syndrome can have differences in the shape or structure of their heart (congenital heart defect) and might have an abnormally wide aorta (aortic dilatation).

Introduction
Malan syndrome was first described in 2010 by Dr. Valerie Malan. Prior to 2010, individuals with these symptoms and characteristics were diagnosed with “Sotos-like syndrome” because many of the medical problems associated with Malan syndrome are similar to a different genetic disorder, known as Sotos syndrome.

symptoms:
Symptoms of Malan syndrome generally appear in infancy. Most symptoms are related to a child’s size or developmental milestones. Malan syndrome is reported to have variable expressivity. Variable expressivity means that there is a range of symptoms that can occur in people affected with the same genetic condition.
Most affected individuals have a larger head size (macrocephaly, 75%), intellectual disability, motor delay, speech delay, autism or autistic-like behaviors (such as difficulty with social situations, understanding emotions, repetitive behaviors or dislike of certain sounds or textures), mental health concerns such as anxiety, weak muscles (hypotonia), seizures, differences noted on  brain MRI imaging (such as underdevelopment of corpus callosum [part of the brain that connects the left and the right side], wide ventricles, brain atrophy [smaller size of the brain], and Chiari malformation [brain tissue extends into the spinal canal], misaligned eyes (strabismus), involuntary shaking of eyes (nystagmus), vision issues (difficulty seeing near or far away), smaller size in the optic nerve causing vision loss (optic nerve hypoplasia or atrophy), above average height for age (tall stature), slender or thin body shape, advanced bone age, spine curvature, bones in the chest growing inward making a dip in the chest (pectus excavatum) or bones in the chest grow outward causing a bulge in the chest (pectus carinatum).
Less common medical problems include hearing problems or reduced tolerance of sound (hyperacusis), increased risk for bone fractures, difference in shape or structure of the heart (congenital heart defect), including a larger aorta, which is the part of the heart that carries blood to the rest of your body (aortic dilatation). Malan syndrome is an exceptionally rare condition, and other medical problems might be found to be associated with this condition in the future.
Individuals with Malan syndrome can look similar to one another, and geneticists or other healthcare providers may use specific terms to describe what they see on the physical exam. Things they might note may include a long, narrow, triangular-shaped face, broad forehead, down-slanting eyes, prominent chin, small mouth, misaligned and twisted teeth because of lack of space in the mouth (dental crowding), roof of the mouth that is deeper than expected (high arched palate), anteverted nose (tip of the nose is upturned), short nose, long fingers and toes, increased range of movement of joints (hypermobility) and blue tint to the whites of the eyes (blue sclera).

