Malaria

synonyms:
Acute MalariaAgueAutochthonous MalariaChronic MalariaImported MalariaInduced MalariaIntermittent MalariaJungle FeverPaludismRelapsing MalariaSwamp FeverTherapeutic Malaria

overview:
Malaria is a communicable parasitic disorder spread through the bite of the Anopheles mosquito. Major symptoms may vary depending on which species of parasite causes the infection and the stage of development of the parasite. Chills and fever commonly occur, although not every case follows the same pattern.  Although the disorder was once thought to be under control throughout the world, malaria is a widespread infection especially in the tropics where certain types of mosquitos are becoming resistant to pesticides. The annual number of cases reported in the United States has increased in recent years.

symptoms:
Symptoms of malaria vary depending on which of the four parasite species is the cause.  Severity of symptoms may differ as the parasite goes through three different stages of development in humans.  It is possible to contract more than one kind of malaria at a time.  Symptoms may begin a week after exposure to the mosquito or may show up months later, even with preventive treatment.
An incubation period ranging of up to forty days is usually followed by a feeling of listlessness, loss of appetite, headaches, muscle aches, low fever, and other flu-like symptoms.  Then onset of rigidity or spasms usually lasting twenty to thirty minutes may occur.  Following this, teeth rattling chills and fever (possibly reaching 107 degrees F.) may last from three to eight hours.  Profuse sweating and a feeling of exhaustion mark the end of the feverish stage.  Cold sores may appear on the lips or nose, skin may be pale, slightly bluish, or dry and flushed in appearance.  An increased heart rate may be associated with heavy breathing.  The spleen may become enlarged. Bloody diarrhea rarely may occur.  If the brain is involved, headaches or depression may develop.  Anemia, marked weight loss, mild yellowish discoloration of the skin (jaundice), swelling of the ankles, digestive difficulties, and muscle weakness can occur.
Until drugs are administered, symptoms such as diarrhea, vomiting or nausea may recur.  Between episodes of these symptoms, patients may feel well except for tiredness.  Without treatment, symptoms often redevelop months or even years later.  Although subsequent attacks may be milder due to built-up immunity, the infection can last from one to twenty years.  With treatment, patients usually recover and live a normal life span.  Cerebral malaria is a form of malaria that occurs when the immune system produces a certain protein called “tumor necrosis factor” (TNF) or “cachectin.”  This complication develops in less than one percent of cases.  In third world countries, malaria frequently presents life threatening complications.

