Mandibuloacral Dysplasia

overview:
Summary
Mandibuloacral dysplasia (MAD) is an extremely rare genetic disorder characterized by underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the lower jaw (mandible) and the collarbone (clavicle), bone loss at the ends of the fingers and toes (acro-osteolysis), skin degeneration (cutaneous atrophy), and partial lipodystrophy, a condition marked by selective loss of body fat (adipose tissue) from various areas of the body. Cutaneous atrophy and lipodystrophy may contribute to affected children having a prematurely-aged appearance (progeroid features). Lipodystrophy may be associated with clinical features of metabolic syndrome including insulin resistance, impaired glucose tolerance, and diabetes mellitus. Additional symptoms can occur as well. Two types of mandibuloacral dysplasia have been identified, type A and type B. Both types are inherited as autosomal recessive conditions. Mandibuloacral dysplasia type A (MADA) is caused by mutations of the lamin A/C (LMNA) gene; mandibuloacral dysplasia type B (MADB) is caused by mutations of the zinc metalloproteinase (ZMPSTE24) gene.
Introduction
Mandibuloacral dysplasia may be classified as a form of lipodystrophy or progeria because of its overlapping symptoms. Mandibuloacral dysplasia type A may also be classified as a laminopathy, a general term for the group of disorders associated with a mutation of the LMNA gene. The ZMPSTE24 mutation that causes mandibuloacral dysplasia type B can also cause restrictive dermopathy syndrome.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of mandibuloacral dysplasia can vary from one person to another. The age of onset of certain symptoms can vary as well. Children with mandibuloacral dysplasia type A often develop normally for the first 4 to 5 years of life. Children with mandibuloacral dysplasia type B can develop noticeable symptoms of the disorder by the age of 2. Mandibuloacral dysplasia type B has only been described in a handful of children. Common symptoms associated with both forms of the disorder have been characterized, but, because of the low number of identified cases, it is difficult to get an accurate picture of associated symptoms and prognosis.
Affected individuals often develop skeletal abnormalities including underdevelopment of the jaw bone giving the appearance of a receding chin. The collarbone may be underdeveloped or malformed (dysplastic) giving the appearance of sloping shoulders. Delayed closure of the fibrous joints of the skull (cranial sutures) in affected infants is common. Bone loss may occur at the ends of the finger and toes, giving them a rounded (bulbous) or stubby appearance.
Affected individuals may have “progeroid” features that give them a prematurely aged appearance. Such features include a distinctive facial appearance, a mottled skin color (pigmentation), thin, sparse hair with patchy areas of hair loss (alopecia), loss of eyebrows, malformation of the fingernails and toenails, and degeneration of the skin, especially the skin of the hands and feet. The distinctive facial features associated with this disorder may include prominent eyes, pointed (pinched) nose, small mouth, and a receding chin (due to mandibular hypoplasia). Affected individuals may also have a high-pitched voice. Some individuals may experience delayed sexual maturation. The progeroid appearance may be more pronounced in individuals with mandibuloacral dysplasia type B.
Individuals with mandibuloacral dysplasia may develop lipodystrophy, a condition characterized by the loss of body (subcutaneous) fat. Two different patterns of partial lipodystrophy have been identified. In one form, fat loss occurs primarily on the arms and legs and sometimes the trunk. Fat may be normal or slightly excess in the neck, the back of the head (occiput) and upper back causing a hump, and trunk areas. In the other form, fat loss occurs in a more widespread (generalized) form affecting the face, trunk and arms and legs. Many individuals with mandibuloacral dysplasia type A have developed lipodystrophy around puberty, but earlier development has been reported. Individuals with mandibuloacral dysplasia type B have developed the generalized form of lipodystrophy, but onset may not be until later during childhood.
Lipodystrophy may be associated with the clinical features of metabolic syndrome. Metabolic complications have generally been mild in individuals with mandibuloacral dysplasia. Insulin resistance may occur and can be associated with a condition called acanthosis nigricans, a skin condition characterized by abnormally increased coloration (hyperpigmentation) and “velvety” thickening (hyperkeratosis) of the skin, particularly of skin fold regions, such as of the neck and groin and under the arms (axillae). Acanthosis nigricans has not been reported in individuals with mandibuloacral dysplasia type B. Other complications of insulin resistance may occur including glucose intolerance, hypertriglyceridemia, and diabetes.
Additional symptoms have been reported including dental abnormalities such as premature loss of teeth and overcrowding, stiff and/or rigid joints, and growth retardation ultimately resulting in adult height that is below normal (short stature).
Some individuals with mandibuloacral dysplasia type B have developed muscle disease (myopathy). Later in life, they are at risk of developing calcified skin nodules, cardiovascular disease such as high blood pressure or hardening of the arteries (atherosclerosis), and a kidney disease known as focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS). This kidney disorder occurs when clusters of capillaries known as renal glomeruli, which normally filter the blood that passes through the kidneys, are replaced by scar tissue. This condition can cause foamy urine due to the presence of excess protein, swelling due to abnormal fluid accumulation (edema), high blood pressure, and weight gain. FSGS can potentially progress to cause severe complications such as nephrotic syndrome and, ultimately, kidney failure.

