Mantle Cell Lymphoma

overview:
Summary
Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a type of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, which is a form of cancer that affects the lymphatic system. Lymphomas are cancers that involve white blood cells, and can be divided depending on the type of cell involved, either B-lymphocytes or T-lymphocytes. MCL is a B-cell lymphoma that develops from malignant B-lymphocytes within a region of the lymph node known as the mantle zone. It affects mostly men who are usually 60 to 70 years old. Approximately one out of 200,000 individuals per year are diagnosed with MCL. The symptoms individuals experience depends on the extent of the disease and the region of the body that is affected. Many affected individuals have widespread disease at diagnosis, with involved regions often including multiple lymph nodes, the spleen, and, potentially, the bone marrow, the liver, and/or regions of the digestive (gastrointestinal) tract. Examples of symptoms include swollen painless lymph nodes, headache, weakness, decreased appetite, and indigestion. Other non-specific symptoms may include fever, weight loss, sweating at night (“night sweats”), fatigue, reduced energy, easy bruising or bleeding. Several treatment options are available. The management selected will be based on a number of patient and disease characteristics. The first-line treatment typically includes chemotherapy combined with immunotherapy, which is a combination of medications that destroy the cancer cells. This approach is meant to cause complete or partial disappearance of the cancer (remission). Following that, patients may be eligible for a stem cell transplant, and/or an extended course of immunotherapy that is meant to prolong cancer remission.
Introduction
Mantle cell lymphoma belongs to a group of diseases known as non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas, which are related malignancies (cancers) that affect the lymphatic system. Functioning as part of the immune system, the lymphatic system helps to protect the body against infection and disease. It consists of a network of tubular channels (lymph vessels) that drain a thin watery fluid known as lymph from different areas of the body into the bloodstream. Lymph accumulates in the tiny spaces between tissue cells and contains proteins, fats, and certain white blood cells known as lymphocytes.
As lymph moves through the lymphatic system, it is filtered by a network of small structures known as lymph nodes that help to remove microorganisms (e.g., viruses, bacteria, etc.) and other foreign bodies. Groups of lymph nodes are located throughout the body, including in the neck, under the arms (axillae), at the elbows, and in the chest, abdomen, and groin. Lymphocytes are stored within lymph nodes and may also be found in other lymphatic tissues. In addition to the lymph nodes, the lymphatic system includes the spleen. Lymphatic tissues also include the thymus, a relatively small organ behind the breastbone that is thought to play an important role in the immune system until puberty, as well as the bone marrow, which is the spongy tissue inside the cavities of bones that manufactures blood cells. Lymphatic tissue or circulating lymphocytes may also be located in other regions of the body, such as the skin, small intestine, liver, and other organs. There are two main types of lymphocytes: B-lymphocytes, which may produce specific antibodies to “neutralize” certain invading microorganisms, and T-lymphocytes, which may directly destroy microorganisms or assist in the activities of other lymphocytes.
Mantle cell lymphoma and other cancers of the lymphatic system (lymphomas) result from errors in the production of a lymphocyte or transformation of a lymphocyte into a malignant cell. Abnormal, uncontrolled growth and multiplication (proliferation) of malignant lymphocytes may lead to enlargement of a specific lymph node region or regions; involvement of other lymphatic tissues, such as the spleen and bone marrow; and spread to other bodily tissues and organs, potentially resulting in life-threatening complications. The specific symptoms and physical findings may vary from case to case, depending upon the extent and region(s) of involvement and other factors.
Mantle cell lymphoma is a B-cell lymphoma that develops from malignant B-lymphocytes within a region of the lymph node known as the mantle zone. As previously mentioned, the signs and symptoms of MCL are dependent on the extent of the region of the body that is affected. Although the exact underlying cause is unknown, researchers have identified several genetic changes (or mutations) in the B-cells, which contribute to the multiplication of the cancer cells. For MCL, a mutation referred to as t(11;14) and denotes the exchange of genetic information between chromosome 11 and 14, leads to the overproduction of a protein called cyclin D1 in the lymphoma cells as will be further explained in the “Causes” section of this report below. These changes are found in more than 90 percent of patients with MCL and are important for diagnosis.
Several disease characteristics are considered when attempting to determine if the cancer will be indolent or aggressive. Indolent lymphomas tend to grow slowly and result in few associated symptoms, whereas more aggressive lymphomas, typically grow rapidly, requiring prompt treatment. There is some debate concerning whether MCL should be categorized as a slow-growing (indolent) or rapidly-growing (aggressive) lymphoma. Although experts have classified MCL as an aggressive lymphoma, it has been shown to have certain characteristics of indolent lymphoma.

symptoms:
Many individuals with mantle cell lymphoma may not have symptoms (asymptomatic) during early stages of the disease. However, affected individuals may eventually seek medical attention due to persistent, usually painless, swelling of certain lymph nodes, particularly nodes within the neck and throat region (e.g., Waldeyer’s ring). Waldeyer’s ring consists of the protective ring of lymphoid tissues near the base of the tongue (lingual tonsils); on either side of the throat (palantine tonsils); and near the back opening of the nasal cavity (pharyngeal tonsils or adenoids). Individuals with non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas (NHLs), including MCL, may also have enlargement of other lymph nodes, such as nodes at the elbows or shoulders; under the arms (axillae); in the chest, abdominal, and/or pelvic regions; and/or in other areas. Lymph node enlargement may be confined to a single region or be present in various areas of the body.
Some affected individuals may develop additional symptoms and signs that are “non-specific” in nature, meaning that they may be associated with any number of underlying disorders, including other forms of lymphoma (other non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas and Hodgkin’s disease). For example, some individuals may have lack of appetite (anorexia), nausea, vomiting, and indigestion. Additional symptoms may include a sense of “fullness” (satiety), abdominal swelling (distension) or bloating, and abdominal pain or discomfort. Such findings may be due to enlargement of abdominal lymph nodes and/or of the spleen (splenomegaly) or liver (hepatomegaly) or involvement of the gastrointestinal tract.
Some individuals with MCL may also develop certain generalized (systemic) symptoms known as “B symptoms.” Such symptoms include persistent or repeated fever, unexplained weight loss (i.e., loss of at least 10 percent of normal body weight in the 6 months prior to diagnosis), and/or sweating, particularly at night (known as “night sweats”). It is suggested that up to one third of individuals with MCL may have “B symptoms” by the time they present to their doctor. However, such findings more commonly occur in individuals with Hodgkin’s disease as compared to those with different forms of NHL. (For further information on Hodgkin’s disease, please see the “Related Disorders” section below.)
Depending upon the extent and region(s) of involvement, some individuals with MCL may develop other or additional symptoms and findings due to infiltration by proliferating lymphoma cells within and impaired functioning or failure of certain organs and tissues. If MCL has spread to involve the bone marrow, for example, malignant lymphocytes may essentially crowd the bone marrow, resulting in decreased manufacture of certain blood cells. (The bone marrow is the soft, spongy tissue located within the cavities of bones that produces blood cells. More specifically, immature cells known as stem cells within the bone marrow develop into the three cellular components of the blood: i.e., red blood cells, which contain the oxygen-carrying pigment hemoglobin; white blood cells, which help to fight infection; and platelets, which play an essential role in blood clotting [coagulation].) Some individuals with bone marrow involvement may develop anemia or abnormally low levels of the oxygen-transporting component of red blood cells. Associated symptoms may include fatigue, listlessness and lack of energy (lethargy), paleness of the skin (pallor), headaches, and/or other symptoms. Affected individuals may also become susceptible to certain infections, easy bruising and excessive bleeding, and/or other findings.
In some individuals with MCL, there may be involvement of the digestive (gastrointestinal [GI]) tract. In some of these cases, GI involvement may be associated with the development of multiple polyps within the intestines (lymphomatous polyposis). Intestinal polyps are growths of tissue that project, often on a stalk, from the intestinal wall. In addition, in some rare cases, MCL may also spread to involve the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system [CNS]), potentially resulting in certain neurologic signs. Although such symptoms may be variable, they may include lethargy, headaches, weakness, confusion, personality changes, sudden episodes of uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain (seizures), and/or other findings.
Depending on MCL subtype, sites and extent of involvement, disease management, and other factors, disease progression may eventually lead to life-threatening complications. (For further information on subtypes, disease staging, treatment options, etc., please see the “Classification,” “Staging,” and “Standard Therapies” section of this report below.)

