Maple Syrup Urine Disease

synonyms:
BCKD Deficiencybranched-chain ketoacid dehydrogenase deficiencybranched-chain ketoaciduriaMSUD

overview:
Summary
Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by deficiency of an enzyme complex (branched-chain alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase) that is required to break down (metabolize) the three branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) leucine, isoleucine and valine, in the body. The result of this metabolic failure is that all three BCAAs, along with a number of their toxic byproducts, (specifically their respective organic acids), all accumulate abnormally. In the classic, severe form of MSUD, plasma concentrations of the BCAAs begin to rise within a few hours of birth. If untreated, symptoms begin to emerge, often within the first 24-48 hours of life.
The presentation starts with non-specific symptoms of increasing neurological dysfunction and include lethargy, irritability and poor feeding, soon followed by focal neurological signs such as abnormal movements, increasing spasticity, and shortly thereafter, by seizures and deepening coma. If untreated, progressive brain damage is inevitable and death occurs usually within weeks or months. The only specific finding that is unique to MSUD is the development of a characteristic odor, reminiscent of maple syrup that can most readily be detected in the urine and earwax and may be smelled within a day or two of birth. The toxicity is the result of damaging effects of leucine on the brain accompanied by severe ketoacidosis caused by accumulation of the three branched-chain ketoacids (BCKAs).
The disorder can be successfully managed through a specialized diet in which the three BCAAs are rigorously controlled. However, even with treatment, patients of any age with MSUD remain at high risk for developing acute metabolic decompensation (metabolic crises) often triggered by infection, injury, failure to eat (fasting) or even by psychological stress. During these episodes there is a rapid, sudden rise in amino acid levels necessitating immediate medical intervention.
There are three or possibly four types of MSUD: the classic type; intermediate type, intermittent type, and possibly a thiamine-responsive type. Each of the various subtypes of MSUD have different levels of residual enzyme activity which account for the variable severity and age of onset. All forms are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
Introduction
Newborn screening for MSUD is performed throughout the US and in many other countries so that most such infants are detected through these programs. Where such screening is not available, infants with MSUD usually present with advancing neurological signs. Early diagnosis and treatment stabilizes the infants and, if well and consistently performed, can largely mitigate against serious long-term complications.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of MSUD varies greatly from patient to patient and largely depends upon the amount of residual enzyme activity.
Classic maple syrup urine disease is the most common and most severe form of MSUD characterized by little to no enzyme activity. Most infants with classic MSUD show subtle emerging non-specific symptoms within 2-3 days; these include poor feeding at bottle or breast and increasing lethargy and irritability. As the decline continues, the infant further disengages and then starts to show increasing focal neurologic signs including abnormal movements together with increasing hypertonia and spasticity progressing to seizures and coma. There may be temporary episodes of extreme hypotonia. In the end, central neurologic function fails with respiratory failure and death. By the time that the early symptoms have emerged, a distinctive odor of maple syrup may be detected in cerumen, sweat, and urine. This is derived from one of the BCKA organic acids derived from its respective BCAA that accumulate as the disorder spirals out of control. The odor cannot usually be detected during periods of metabolic stability.
Once the disorder has been treated and stabilized, there remains a life-long threat of sudden or gradual recurrent metabolic decompensation that results in a return of all the symptoms typical of untreated cases. Dietary intake of the BCAAs must be strictly controlled and monitored. But even without any change in dietary intake, metabolic crises can occur caused by an imbalance between the inherent residual activity of the enzyme and increased BCAAs release of protein from the tissues due to increased breakdown (catabolism). An increasing catabolic rate can occur insidiously or may develop rapidly during any metabolic stress, including infection, even if very mild, psychological or physical stress, trauma or fasting. These episodes are characterized by emergence of the symptoms that are typical in an untreated case and are due to elevated BCAAs, especially leucine and the three associated BCKAs. Every episode can turn into a metabolic crisis and must be treated as vigorously as any episode in a newborn. Individuals with classic MSUD may show a degree of intellectual limitation and may develop a variety of behavioral issues including attention deficient hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), impulsivity, anxiety and/or depression and seizures.
Additional complications with classic MSUD include generalized loss of bone mass (osteoporosis) that may predispose to fractures, and inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis). Some individuals may develop increased pressure in the skull (intracranial hypertension), which causes painful headaches that are sometimes associated with nausea and vomiting.
Intermediate MSUD is characterized by greater levels of residual enzyme activity than is seen with classic MSUD. The onset and symptoms of intermediate MSUD may be neonatal, but the majority of children are diagnosed between the ages of five months and seven years. Symptoms, when they occur, are similar to those of the classical form and may include lethargy, feeding problems, poor growth, ataxia, and acute metabolic crises that result in seizures, coma, brain damage, and, in rare cases, life-threatening neurological complications. It should be noted that Intermediate MSUD patients are susceptible to the same degree of neurologic complications and extreme acidosis as those with classic MSUD. The characteristic odor of maple syrup in the earwax, sweat and urine, is present. Some affected children may remain asymptomatic until later in life. Disease management principles are the same for both.
Intermittent MSUD is usually characterized by normal growth and intellectual development and affected individuals often can tolerate normal levels of protein in their diet. Symptoms are provoked by the same stressors as in classical MSUD. Thiamine-response MSUD responds to treatment with thiamine (vitamin B1). Thiamine plays a role in the BCAA enzyme complex. The symptoms and clinical course of thiamine-responsive MSUD resembles intermediate MSUD and rarely presents in the newborn period. Affected infants respond to large doses of thiamine, which boosts residual enzyme activity. No individuals with thiamine-responsive MSUD have been treated solely with thiamine – most follow a combination of thiamine with a partially-restricted protein diet.
While the majority of patients fall into the categories above, several families with multiple affected members have been identified who do not fit the criteria for any of the above subtypes. These unique patients are deemed unclassified MSUD.
It should be emphasized that in the presence of such apparently non-specific neurologic findings, the diagnosis of MSUD cannot be excluded by the absence of the maple syrup smell.

