Marfan Syndrome

synonyms:
MFS

overview:
Marfan syndrome is a genetic disorder that affects connective tissue, which is the material between cells of the body that gives the tissues form and strength. Connective tissue is found all over the body and multiple organ systems may be affected in individuals with Marfan syndrome. The heart and blood vessels (cardiovascular), skeletal, and eye (ocular) systems are most often affected. Major symptoms include overgrowth of the long bones of the arms and legs, abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis), indentation or protrusion of the chest wall (pectus deformity), dislocation of the lenses of the eyes (ectopia lentis), nearsightedness (myopia), widening (aneurysm) and tear (dissection) of the main artery that carries blood away from the heart (aorta), floppiness of the mitral valve (mitral valve prolapse) and backward flow of blood through the aortic and mitral valves (aortic and mitral regurgitation). The specific symptoms and the severity of Marfan syndrome vary greatly from person to person. Marfan syndrome is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, meaning that only one abnormal copy of the Marfan gene inherited from one parent is sufficient to have the condition. Defects or deletions (pathogenic variants) of the fibrillin-1 (FBN1) gene have been shown to cause Marfan syndrome.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms of Marfan syndrome vary greatly from person to person. Some individuals will develop only a few mild or isolated symptoms; others will develop more serious complications. In most cases, Marfan syndrome progresses as individuals grow older. In some infants, Marfan syndrome may cause severe, rapidly progressive complications during infancy, often quickly affecting multiple organ systems early in life. Marfan syndrome can potentially affect many systems of the body including the heart, blood vessels, skeleton, eyes, lungs, and skin.
Individuals with Marfan syndrome often develop distinct physical findings often including an abnormally thin physique and disproportionately long, slender arms and legs (dolichostenomelia) due to overgrowth of the long bones. In addition, affected individuals usually have abnormally long, slender fingers (arachnodactyly). People with Marfan syndrome are usually very tall and thin in comparison to unaffected family members but not necessarily in comparison to the general population. They can lack muscle tone (hypotonia) and have little fat under the skin (subcutaneous fat).
A variety of skeletal malformations affect individuals with Marfan syndrome including overgrowth of the ribs, which can push the breastbone (sternum) inward resulting in a sunken chest (pectus excavatum) or outward resulting in a protruding chest (pectus carinatum). Additional symptoms include abnormally loose or flexible joints (joint hypermobility), flat feet (pes planus), fingers that are permanently bent or “fixed” and cannot extend or straighten fully (camptodactyly or clinodactyly), and reduced extension of the elbow. In some cases, the joints may be unaffected or may become tight and stiff (contractures). Some individuals have an abnormally deep hip socket (acetabulum) with deep insertion of the head of the long bone (femur) of the leg (protrusio acetabulae) and signs of bone erosion. Many individuals with Marfan syndrome develop spinal abnormalities such as progressive curving of the spine (scoliosis) that may be mild or severe. Scoliosis may be associated with back pain in some affected individuals. In children, skeletal abnormalities may progress rapidly during phases of rapid growth, such as adolescence.
Individuals with Marfan syndrome may have several distinct facial features including a long, narrow skull (dolichocephaly), deep-set eyes (enophthalmos), an abnormally small jaw (micrognathia) that may be recessed farther back than normal (retrognathia), abnormally flat cheek bones (malar hypoplasia), and an abnormal downward slant to the eyes (downward slanting palpebral fissures). Affected individuals may also exhibit a highly-arched roof of the mouth (palate), teeth that are crowded together and upper and lower teeth that do not meet (align) properly when biting (malocclusion).
Individuals with Marfan syndrome may have significant cardiovascular problems such as a common heart defect known as mitral valve prolapse. The mitral valve is located between the left upper and left lower chambers (left atrium and left ventricle, respectively) of the heart. Mitral valve prolapse occurs when one or both of the flaps (cusps) of the mitral valve bulge or collapse backward (prolapse) into the left upper chamber (atrium) of the heart during ventricular contraction. In some cases, this may allow leakage or the backward flow of blood from the left lower chamber of the heart (ventricle) back into the left atrium (mitral regurgitation). Often no associated symptoms are apparent (asymptomatic). However, in other cases, mitral valve prolapse can result in chest pain, abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias), or evidence of inadequate heart function (congestive heart failure, most often in association with prolonged and severe mitral regurgitation).
Additional cardiovascular findings include widening (aneurysm) and degeneration of the main artery that carries blood away from the heart (aorta), tearing (dissection) of the aorta so that blood seeps between the inner and outer layers of the aortic wall, and backward flow of blood from the aorta into the lower left chamber (ventricle) of the heart (aortic regurgitation). If severe and left untreated, these heart abnormalities associated with Marfan syndrome can cause life-threatening complications such as rupture of the aorta and congestive heart failure. Some individuals may develop widening of the main artery of the lungs (pulmonary artery dilatation). This typically does not cause any problems in people with Marfan syndrome.
Individuals with Marfan syndrome commonly develop abnormalities of the eyes, especially nearsightedness (myopia), which may develop early in childhood and become progressively worse. Approximately 60 percent of individuals develop displacement of the lenses of the eyes away from the center of the eye (ectopia lentis). Ectopia lentis may occur at birth or later in life and may remain stable or become progressively worse.
Additional issues affecting the eyes in Marfan syndrome include an abnormally flat cornea (the front portion of the eyes through which light passes), underdevelopment of the colored portion of the eye (hypoplastic iris), and detachment of the nerve-rich membrane (retina) lining the back of the eyes. Some individuals with Marfan syndrome are at risk for the early development of clouding of the lenses of the eyes (cataracts) or increased pressure and/or associated changes in the eyes (glaucoma). If left untreated, eye abnormalities can result in vision loss.
Some individuals with Marfan syndrome may develop distended air pockets near the top of the lungs (apical pulmonary blebs), which can predispose individuals to a leak of air within the chest cavity and lung collapse that occurs for no readily apparent reason (spontaneous pneumothorax). In some cases, pneumothorax can recur in the same lung or even the opposite lung (recurrent pneumothorax).
Some affected individuals may develop widening or bulging of the sac (dura) that surrounds the spinal cord (dural ectasia). This condition usually does not cause symptoms (asymptomatic), but has been associated with lower back pain and can cause pinching of a nerve leading to abnormal sensations or muscle performance in the legs. Affected individuals may also developed stretch marks (striae atrophicae) of the skin without an obvious cause. Some affected individuals may have an inguinal, umbilical or surgical hernia, in which a weakened portion of the pelvic or abdominal wall shows external bulging and even protrusion of a small segment of the intestines.
Researchers have identified a subset of individuals with symptoms that are extremely similar to those associated with Marfan syndrome; however, these individuals have changes in different genes. Of equal importance, these individuals have now been recognized to be at risk for numerous features that are not seen in Marfan syndrome caused by mutations inFBN1. While a subset of these patients were historically designated as having Marfan syndrome type II, it is now more common practice to specify alternative diagnoses including Loeys-Dietz syndrome or Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome (see the Related Disorders section below). People with a Marfan-like condition caused by mutations in a gene other thanFBN1may require specialized counseling, imaging protocols and management.

