Marshall-Smith Syndrome

synonyms:
MSS

overview:
Summary
Marshall-Smith syndrome (MSS) typically begins before birth and is characterized by excessive and rapid physical growth, specifically in bone development (maturation). Other symptoms that may occur in an individual with Marshall-Smith syndrome are developmental delays, respiratory issues and infections, as well as distinguishing physical characteristics.
Introduction
The first cases of Marshall-Smith syndrome were identified in 1971 by physicians R.E. Marshall, C.B. Graham, C.R. Scott, and D.W. Smith. These two MSS cases were identified in male infant patients who died by the age of 20 months. (Note: Marshall-Smith syndrome is not to be confused with “Marshall” syndrome, which is very different from “Marshall-Smith” syndrome.)

symptoms:
Marshall-Smith syndrome (MSS) is largely characterized with faster than normal bone growth. Due to their taller stature, patients have low muscle tone, muscle weakness, and may experience difficulties in gaining weight. Patients with Marshall-Smith syndrome may also have abdominal hernias (umbilical hernias), intellectual developmental delays, psychomotor delays (slowing down of thought and voluntary movements), and/or breathing difficulties. The breathing difficulties can sound like a high-pitched noisy breath, due to abnormal neck extension, with the tongue blocking the airway. Some traits related to the windpipe of Marshall-Smith syndrome patients include the abnormal development of the leaf-shaped structure in the throat that stops foods and liquids from entering the windpipe. The nasal passages may be smaller, and these patients may have an abnormal larynx with soft cartilage. Patients with Marshall-Smith syndrome typically have a long head with a prominent forehead, prominent eyes, an upturned nose with a low nasal bridge, and excessive hair growth. The patient’s eye whites may appear bluish, and the lower jawbone may be smaller than average. Their fingertips may appear narrow while the rest of the finger may appear broad.
Some patients with MSS may experience additional symptoms including a shorter breastbone, as well as a deep crease between the big toe and the second toe. Some brain abnormalities may occur, including atrophy (loss of brain cells), macrogyria (larger than normal grooves in the brain), or a missing corpus callosum. Patients with Marshall-Smith syndrome may have poor immune systems, and on rare occasions, babies with this syndrome could be born with part of their intestines outside of their bodies via the belly button.

