Maternally Inherited Leigh Syndrome and NARP Syndrome

synonyms:
MILS-NARP syndrome

overview:
Summary
Maternally inherited Leigh syndrome (MILS) and neuropathy, ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP) syndrome are rare genetic multisystem disorders that are part of a spectrum or continuum of disease caused by abnormalities affecting mitochondrial energy production. NARP is characterized by nerve disease affecting the nerves outside of the central nervous system (peripheral neuropathy), an impaired ability to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia), an eye condition known as retinitis pigmentosa (RP), and a variety of additional abnormalities. MILS is generally a more severe mitochondrial disorder that often becomes apparent during infancy or childhood and is characterized by brain disease (encephalopathy), elevated levels of lactic acid in the body (lactic acidosis), seizures, heart disease (cardiomyopathy), breathing (respiratory) abnormalities, and developmental delays. The specific symptoms and severity of these disorders in each individual can vary greatly from one person to another and even among members of the same family.
MILS and NARP syndrome are maternally inherited mitochondrial disorders. They are caused by specific mutations affecting the mitochondrial gene known as the ATPase 6 gene. When individuals have more than 90 percent of mutated mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) in their cells, they are classified as having MILS and not NARP syndrome. Most individuals with NARP syndrome have 70-80 percent of mutated mtDNA. In some families, one individual may have NARP syndrome while another individual is diagnosed with MILS. (For more information on mtDNA see the Causes section below.)
Introduction
Mitochondrial disorders are characterized by mutations affecting the parts of the cell that release energy (mitochondria). Mitochondrial diseases often hamper the ability of affected cells to break down food and oxygen and produce energy. In most mitochondrial disorders, abnormally high numbers of defective mitochondria are present in the cells of the body. Mitochondrial diseases often affect more than one organ system of the body. NARP syndrome was first identified in the medical literature in 1990. Leigh syndrome was first reported in the medical literature in 1951.The term “Leigh Syndrome” represents a clinical constellation of symptoms and characteristic MRI pattern and can occur due to many metabolic and genetic causes of which mitochondrial disorders are the most common. MILS is one of many causes of Leigh syndrome.

symptoms:
The symptoms of this spectrum of disease can vary dramatically from one person to another. Some individuals may have no apparent symptoms (asymptomatic) or only mild symptoms; other individuals may have severe, life-threatening complications, even during infancy in some cases of MILS. The severity of symptoms often correlates to the amount of mutated mtDNA in cells. Generally, the more mutated mtDNA, the worse the symptoms.
It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individual and/or their families should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
NEUROPATHY, ATAXIA & RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA (NARP) SYNDROME
Individuals with NARP syndrome will display some combination of the following symptoms. The onset of symptoms is often during early childhood. Individuals with NARP syndrome may remain stable for years. However, they often experience episodes of deterioration usually associated with a viral illness.
Common symptoms associated with NARP syndrome include an impaired ability to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia), migraines, seizures, learning disabilities, and delays in attaining development milestones such as sitting up, crawling, or walking (developmental delays).Individuals with NARP syndrome also have disease affecting the nerves that results in loss of sensation (sensory neuropathy). Affected individuals may develop muscle weakness affecting the arms and legs, especially affecting the muscles of the upper arms and upper legs (proximal muscle weakness).
Affected individuals also have eye (ocular) symptoms. The first ocular symptom is usually salt-and-pepper retinopathy, a condition where colored spots form on the membrane lining the eyes (retina) giving it a “salt and pepper” appearance. Affected individuals eventually develop retinitis pigmentosa (RP). RP is a general term for a group of vision disorders that cause progressive degeneration of the retina resulting in visual impairment. RP usually begins with difficulty seeing at night, eventually leading to night blindness. Additional ocular symptoms include rapid, involuntary eye movements (nystagmus) and sluggish pupils.
Additional symptoms have been reported in individuals with NARP syndrome including hearing loss, progressive paralysis of certain eye muscles (progressive external ophthalmoplegia), cardiac conduction defects such as heart block, and a mild anxiety disorder. Affected individuals may eventually develop dementia. Short stature has also been reported.
The abnormal accumulation of lactic acid in the blood (lactic acidosis), which is a common finding in mitochondrial disorders, rarely occurs in NARP syndrome.
MATERNALLY INHERITED LEIGH SYNDROME (MILS)
MILS is often apparent during the first three months to one year of life. However, onset can occur at any time from birth through adulthood. Later onset is often associated with a slower progression of symptoms. Many cases of MILS first become apparent following a viral infection.The specific symptoms and severity of MILS can vary greatly from individual to the next. Generally, Leigh syndrome, which is also known as infantile necrotizing encephalopathy, is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder. If the onset is during infancy, the initial signs may be poor sucking ability and loss of head control. Additional early symptoms can include a profound loss of appetite, recurrent vomiting, irritability, continuous crying and possible seizure activity. Delays in reaching developmental milestones may also occur.
Affected individuals may experience decompensation, which is the inability of an organ system to compensate for illness or deficiency. In MILS, decompensation occurs during an illness and is typically associated with the progressive loss of abilities requiring the coordination of mental and muscular activity (psychomotor regression).
When the onset of the disorder is later during childhood, ataxia or difficulty articulating words (dysarthria) may be the initial signs. Ataxia can cause affected children to appear clumsy or unsteady. As mentioned above, affected children may also lose previously acquired intellectual skills and intellectual disability can occur. Progressive neurological deterioration associated with MILS may be characterized by additional symptoms including generalized muscle weakness, lack of muscle tone (hypotonia), tremors, movement disorders such as chorea (rapid, involuntary, jerky movements), seizures, infantile spasms, and spasticity, a condition characterized by involuntary muscle spasms that result in slow, stiff movements of the legs. Dystonia may also occur. Dystonia is a group of neurological disorders characterized by involuntary muscle contractions that force the body into abnormal, sometimes painful, movements and positions.
Individuals with MILS may develop a variety of respiratory abnormalities including the temporary cessation of spontaneous breathing (apnea), difficulty breathing (dyspnea), abnormally rapid breathing (hyperventilation), and/or abnormal breathing patterns. Some infants may also experience difficulty swallowing (dysphagia). Visual problems may include abnormally rapid eye movements (nystagmus), sluggish pupils, crossed eyes (strabismus), paralysis of certain eye muscles (ophthalmoplegia), deterioration of the nerves of the eyes (optic atrophy), and/or visual impairment leading to blindness.
MILS may also affect the heart. Some children with this disorder may have abnormal enlargement of the heart (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy) and overgrowth of the fibrous membrane that divides the various chambers of the heart (asymmetric septal hypertrophy). Disease affecting the nerves outside of the central nervous system (peripheral neuropathy) may eventually occur, causing progressive weakness of the arms and legs.Episodes of lactic acidosis may occur and are characterized by abnormally high levels of lactic acid in the blood, brain and other tissues of the body.
In some cases, life-threatening complications, often secondary to heart or breathing abnormalities, can develop. In some cases of MILS, such complications can develop by three years of age.

