Maxillofacial Dysostosis

synonyms:
autosomal dominant maxillofacial dysostosis

overview:
Maxillofacial dysostosis is an extremely rare genetic disorder characterized by distinctive abnormalities of the head and face (craniofacial) area. Major symptoms include an underdeveloped (hypoplasia) upper jaw, downward-slanting palpebral fissures (which means that the opening between the eyelids slants downward), minor malformations of the external portion of the ears, and speech abnormalities. Maxillofacial dysostosis is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. A second (distinct) form of maxillofacial dysostosis is believed to be inherited as an X-linked recessive trait.

symptoms:
The symptoms and physical findings associated with maxillofacial dysostosis may vary from one person to another. Because so few cases have been identified and reported, it will be difficult to obtain an accurate clinical picture of the disorder. Affected individuals or parents of affected children should talk to their physicians and medical team about their specific case and associated symptoms.
Characteristic findings associated with maxillofacial dysostosis include an underdeveloped (hypoplastic) upper jaw (maxilla), an abnormal downward slant of the opening between the eyelids (palpebral fissures), minor external ear malformations and speech abnormalities.
Although most individuals with maxillofacial dysostosis have normal intelligence, they are often mistakenly thought to be mentally challenged due to their language problems. Their progress should be carefully monitored and educators should be informed of the potential for delayed onset of speech and difficulties with speech development including poor speech articulation (dysarthria).
External ear abnormalities may include malformation of the upper, outer portion of the ear (pinna or auricle). Hearing loss was not seen in any of the individuals with maxillofacial dysostosis reported in the medical literature. Additional symptoms that have been reported in some cases of maxillofacial dysostosis include a sunken chest (pectus excavatum), incomplete or underdeveloped nipples, an abnormally flat skull, and a flattened bridge of the nose. Certain eye abnormalities including drooping of the upper eyelid (ptosis), crossed eyes (strabismus), and rapid, involuntary movements of the eyes (nystagmus) have also been reported.

