Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser Syndrome

synonyms:
congenital absence of the uterus and vagina (CAUV)genital renal ear syndrome (GRES)MRKHMRKH syndromeMullerian agenesisMullerian aplasiaRokitansky syndrome

overview:
Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser (MRKH) syndrome is a rare disorder that affects women. It is characterized by the failure of the uterus and the vagina to develop properly in women who have normal ovarian function and normal external genitalia. Women with this disorder develop normal secondary sexual characteristics during puberty (e.g., breast development and pubic hair), but do not have a menstrual cycle (primary amenorrhea). Often, the failure to begin the menstrual cycle is the initial clinical sign of MRKH syndrome. The range and severity of MRKH syndrome can vary greatly and the disorder is generally broken down into type I, which occurs as an isolated finding, and type II, which occurs with abnormalities of additional organ systems including mainly the kidneys and the skeleton. Because of the nature of the disorder, MRKH syndrome can cause significant psychological challenges and counseling is recommended. The exact cause of MRKH syndrome remains largely unknown, but there is now no doubt of a genetic origin. In this respect, an update on the most recent research publications shows the involvement of several chromosomal segments, some of them including genes likely to account for the disorder.

symptoms:
The symptoms of MRKH syndrome vary greatly from one woman to another. It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
MAYER-ROKITANSKY KÜSTER-HAUSER SYNDROME TYPE I
This form of MRKH syndrome is also known as isolated Mullerian aplasia, or Rokitansky sequence. The disorder is characterized by the failure of the uterus and the vagina to develop properly. The severity of MRKH syndrome type I may vary greatly from one person to another. In most cases, the uterus and/or the vagina have not developed (aplasia); in other rare cases, there may be narrowing (atresia) of the upper portion of the vagina and an underdeveloped or rudimentary uterus. In some cases, the Fallopian tubes may be affected as well. The ovaries of females with MRKH syndrome are unaffected and function normally.
In most cases, the initial symptom of MRKH syndrome type I is the failure to begin menstrual cycles (primary amenorrhea). Despite amenorrhea, affected females do experience normal secondary sexual development including breast development, the growth of hair under the arms and in the pubic area, and an increase in body fat around the hips and other areas. Sex steroid levels, female sexual identification, and level of sexual desire (libido) are all also normal. However, because of the absence of the uterus and properly developed fallopian tubes, all affected women are unable to bear children (infertile). Many affected females also experience difficulty while attempting sexual intercourse due to the shortness of the vagina. Some women may also experience pain during intercourse.
MRKH syndrome type I is sometimes referred to as Mullerian aplasia because the Mullerian ducts are a dual structure within a growing embryo that ultimately develops into the uterus, Fallopian tubes, cervix and the upper portion of the vagina. It is believed that improper development of tissues derived from the Mullerian ducts occurring during embryogenesis, ultimately causes the symptoms of MRKH syndrome.
MAYER-ROKITANSKY-KÜSTER-HAUSER SYNDROME TYPE II
When the abnormalities that characterize MRKH syndrome type I occur in association with additional physical findings, the disorder is classified as MRKH syndrome type II or (Mu)llerian duct aplasia, (R)enal dysplasia and (C)ervical (S)omite anomalies or MURCS association. The most common abnormalities associated with MRKH syndrome type II are failure of the kidneys to development properly (renal adysplasia) and various skeletal malformations, mainly vertebral. Much less frequent defects include heart malformations and hearing impairment.
Women with MRKH syndrome type II may exhibit absence of a kidney (unilateral renal agenesis), malformation of one or the two kidneys (renal dysplasia), underdeveloped (hypoplastic) kidneys and/or improper positioning within the body of one or both kidneys (renal ectopia). Renal abnormalities can cause growth deficiency, kidney stones, an increased susceptibility to urinary tract infections and abnormal accumulation of urine in the kidney due to obstruction (hydronephrosis).
Many females with MRKH syndrome type II also exhibit skeletal malformations. For example, bones (vertebrae) in the spinal column within the neck (cervical vertebrae) and the upper back (thoracic vertebrae) may develop improperly (dysplasia). As a result, some of the vertebrae within the neck may be missing and/or fused, causing shortness of the neck, limited neck motion, and an abnormally low hairline (Klippel-Feil syndrome). In addition, affected females may exhibit asymmetric, fused or wedge vertebrae; malformed or missing ribs; abnormal sideways curvature of the spine (scoliosis); elevation of the shoulder blade (scapula), due to the scapula’s failure to move into the appropriate position during fetal development (Sprengel deformity). (For more information on Klippel-Feil syndrome and Sprengel deformity, please see the Related Disorders section of this report.). Abnormalities of the head and face may also occur including an abnormally small jaw (micrognathia), cleft lip, cleft palate and underdevelopment of one side of the face causing facial asymmetry.
Some affected women develop hearing loss due to the failure of sound waves to be conducted through the middle ear (conductive hearing loss), usually due to structural abnormalities of the middle ear. Hearing loss may also be due to impaired ability of the auditory nerve to transmit sensory input to the brain (sensorineural hearing loss). The degree of hearing impairment may vary. The ears may be malformed (dysplastic) in some cases. When the ears are involved the disorder may be referred to as genital renal ear syndrome (GRES)
In rare cases, some females with MRKH syndrome type II have had additional physical abnormalities including abnormalities of the hands and/or arms and heart malformations. Abnormalities of the extremities may include absence of a portion of one or more fingers or toes (ectrodactyly), webbing of the fingers or toes (syndactyly), duplicated thumb and absence of the long, thin bone of the forearm (absent radius). Heart malformations may include “a hole in the heart” between the two upper chambers of the heart (atrial septal defects), narrowing of the pulmonary valve (pulmonary valvular stenosis) or tetralogy of Fallot, a rare grouping of four different heart defects.

