McKusick Type Metaphyseal Chondrodysplasia

synonyms:
cartilage-hair hypoplasiaCHH

overview:
Summary
McKusick type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia, also known as cartilage-hair hypoplasia (CHH), is a rare inherited disorder marked by unevenly short arms and legs (short-limbed dwarfism), increased joint mobility (hypermobility) and fine silky hair. Cartilage forms improperly at the large (bulbous) end portions (metaphyses) of the long bones in the arms and legs (metaphyseal chondrodysplasia). In addition, most affected individuals have impaired function of the immune system (immunodeficiency) which causes them to get more infections. Individuals with McKusick type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia can have low levels of red blood cells (anemia). Some individuals also experience difficulties in the absorption of nutrients from their food (intestinal malabsorption) and have increased risks for cancer. The most common types of cancer seen in people with this condition are non-Hodgkin lymphoma, basal cell carcinoma and leukemia. The symptoms of McKusick type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia vary between affected individuals, even within the same family. McKusick type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.

Introduction
McKusick type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia was first described in 1965 in the Old Order Amish population. Originally, the syndrome was believed to be characterized by unevenly short arms and legs (short limbed dwarfism), fine and light-colored hair (hypotrichosis), low levels of red blood cells (anemia) and problems with the immune system (immunodeficiency). Now, this condition is considered to be a spectrum of disorders that includes metaphyseal dysplasia without hypotrichosis (MDWH), cartilage hair hypoplasia (CHH) with metaphyseal dysplasia and hypotrichosis and a more severe form called anauxetic dysplasia (AD). McKusick type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia has been reported in approximately 700 individuals and has been extensively studied in the Finnish population. The symptoms are highly variable, even among individuals of the same family. The variability in symptoms seen among affected individuals is not well understood at this time.

symptoms:
Unevenly short arms and legs (short limbed dwarfism) are the most common features in McKusick type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia and are seen in almost all affected individuals. Increased inward curvature of the lower spine (lumbar lordosis) and increased side curvature of the rest of the spine (scoliosis) also cause a shorter height in affected individuals. Median height is estimated to be around 4 feet 3 inches in males and 4 feet 0 inches in females. In individuals with the more severe form, anauxetic dysplasia (AD), the median height is less than 2 feet 10 inches.
Increased joint mobility (hypermobility) has been reported in 87% of affected individuals. The joints in the hands and feet are most commonly affected. However, increased joint mobility can also be present in the knees, which can lead to a bowlegged appearance (varus leg deformity) in around 77% of affected individuals.
Fine, sparse and silky hair (hypotrichosis) is seen in around 90% of individuals with McKusick type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia. In most people, the hair also tends to be blonde or light colored. About 15% of affected individuals have complete hair loss (alopecia) which includes the scalp, eyelashes, eyebrows and body hair.
Decreased red blood cell production (anemia) has been reported in about 80% of affected individuals. The decreased red blood cell production ranges from mild to severe, and usually goes away on its own by childhood. Persistent severe decreased red cell production has only been reported in 6% of individuals.
Decreased white blood cell production (lymphopenia) leads to decreased immunity (immunodeficiency) in around 88% of affected individuals. Decreased immunity leads to an increased rate of infections in approximately 35-65% of affected individuals. Most infections occur during infancy or childhood, and ear and lung infections appear to be the most common. Also, chickenpox can be severe.
The risk for cancer in is estimated to be around 11%. Most cancers tend to be diagnosed when patients are under 44 years old. The most common cancers are non-Hodgkin lymphoma, basal cell carcinoma, leukemia and Hodgkin lymphoma. The reason why individuals with McKusick type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia have increased risks for cancer is unclear at this time.
In about 8% of individuals, the intestines do not absorb nutrients from food properly (intestinal malabsorption). Intestinal malabsorption presents as diarrhea and decreased ability to gain weight (failure to thrive) in the newborn period. Most of the intestinal symptoms appear within the first two years of life. Some individuals have Hirschsprung’s disease, an absence of nerve cells in the intestine which causes constipation beginning at birth.
Other features seen in McKusick type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia include decreased sperm production (spermatogenesis) and autoimmune diseases in which the immune system mistakenly attacks healthy cells, tissues and organs.

