MCT8-Specific Thyroid Hormone Cell Transporter Deficiency

synonyms:
AHDSAllan-Herndon-Dudley syndromeMCT8 deficiencyTHCT deficiency

overview:
MCT8-specific thyroid hormone cell transporter deficiency (MCT8 deficiency) is a genetic disorder characterized by severe intellectual disability, an impaired ability to speak, low muscle tone (hypotonia), disorganized movements and specific thyroid test abnormalities.
Except for poor muscle tone, most affected infants appear to develop normally during the first months of life. However, by about two months of age, an affected infant may seem weak and be unable to hold up their head. Due to hypotonia, severely reduced motor development and other abnormalities, affected children very rarely develop the ability to walk and when they do, it is with a shuffling gait. Associated features often include underdevelopment (hypoplasia) and decreasing (atrophy) of muscle tissue; weakness and stiffness of the legs (spastic paraplegia) with exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia) and relatively slow, involuntary, purposeless (dyskinetic) movements. Writhing movements (athetoid movements) and/or other movement abnormalities are less common. Affected individuals may also have characteristic features of the skull and face. MCT8 deficiency is an X-linked genetic disorder.

symptoms:
MCT8 deficiency is primarily characterized by severe intellectual disability, hypotonia and movement abnormalities. As mentioned above, an affected infant typically appears to develop normally (except for hypotonia) until about 2 months of age, when they may seem to have generalized weakness and be unable to hold up their head. Family members have described this feature as “limber neck.” Due to low muscle tone, weakness, severely reduced motor development and/or other factors, affected children are unable to walk or walk with great difficulty.
Associated findings may include underdevelopment (hypoplasia) and decreasing (atrophy) of various skeletal (voluntary) muscles; an impaired ability to coordinate certain voluntary movements (ataxia); weakness and stiffness of the legs (spastic paraplegia) with associated hyperreflexia and involuntary, rapid, repeated involuntary contractions and relaxations of the legs (clonus). Movement abnormalities are common and include dyskinetic attacks or relatively slow, writhing movements (athetoid movements) and/or other movement abnormalities. Typical dyskinetic attacks last a few minutes or less and consist of body extension, opening of the mouth and stretching or flexing of the limbs. They are usually triggered by physical and emotional stimuli such as changing diapers or clothes. While these episodes are commonly interpreted as being seizures, true epilepsy is uncommon.
As noted earlier, infants and children with the disorder are also affected by severe intellectual disability and delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of muscular and mental activities (psychomotor delay). In addition, affected children are unable to speak, or rarely, acquire garbled speech. Children with MCT8 deficiency are generally good natured and have agreeable behavior.
As adults, affected individuals may have a generalized decrease of muscle (atrophy), permanent fixation of multiple small and large joints in various fixed postures (joint contractures) and/or decreased reflex reactions (hyporeflexia).
Individuals with MCT8 deficiency may also have characteristic craniofacial features and/or additional skeletal abnormalities. The head is usually of normal size but may be narrow at the temples (bitemporal narrowing). The face may appear long and thin with large, poorly developed ears. Some people with MCT8 deficiency have side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis); depression of the breastbone (“funnel chest” or pectus excavatum) and/or foot abnormalities.

