MDR3 Deficiency

overview:
Summary
MDR3 deficiency is a rare genetic disorder that predominantly affects the liver. The disorder includes a spectrum of diseases that can range from mild to severe.
The main symptom is interruption or suppression of the flow of bile from the liver (cholestasis). In addition, affected individuals may be prone to forming gallstones. Cholestasis in MDR3 deficiency occurs due to defects within the liver (intrahepatic), although the defects can also lead to injury of the bile ducts outside the liver (extrahepatic).
Cholestasis can cause yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes and whites of the eyes (jaundice), difficult growing and gaining weight (failure to thrive), growth deficiency, easy bleeding, rickets and persistent itchiness. Symptoms may be present shortly after birth or, in many cases, may not appear until later in childhood or even middle age when the disorder manifests as intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy, gallstone disease or jaundice and scarring of the liver (cirrhosis).
MDR3 deficiency is caused by variants in theABCB4gene and appears to follow autosomal recessive inheritance in most patients. However, this condition may follow autosomal dominant inheritance in some patients.
Introduction
The terminology used to describe MDR3 deficiency can be confusing because there are several diseases that are caused by different variants in theABCB4gene and can result in MDR3 deficiency.
CertainABCB4gene variants lead to a complete failure of production of the MDR3 protein and others result in some protein activity, so there is a wide clinical spectrum of severity in MDR3 deficiency. This can range from progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 3 (PFIC-3) in the more severe end, where there is basically a complete MDR3 deficiency, to less severe forms like low phospholipid associated cholelithiasis (LPAC) syndrome or certain cases of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP), where there are some MDR3 activity.
The medication ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) is effective in some patients (especially those with milder disease) and should be part of the initial treatment. Patients with severe cases may require a liver transplant.

symptoms:
The age of onset, severity and specific symptoms of MDR3 deficiency can vary greatly from one person to another. In PFIC3, cholestasis may be present in newborns babies (neonatal period). Individuals with mild forms of this disorder may not develop symptoms until young adulthood or middle age where MDR3 deficiency may manifest as mild abnormalities in liver blood tests, gallstones, jaundice and/or itching during pregnancy, or as scarring of the liver and/or yellowing of the eyes and skin.
The formation of bile is one of the main functions of the liver. Bile is a fluid that contains water, certain minerals that carry an electric charge (electrolytes), lipids (bile salts, phospholipids, cholesterol) and other materials including an orange-yellow pigment (bilirubin) that is a byproduct of the natural breakdown of the hemoglobin of red blood cells. Bile flow accomplishes two important tasks within the body: it aids in digestion and absorption of dietary fats, fat soluble vitamins and other nutrients and it aids in the elimination of excess cholesterol, bilirubin, waste and toxins from the body.
The main signs and symptoms of MDR3 deficiency include:
Cholestasis (the main characteristic of MDR3 deficiency, usually presenting with episodes during the first few months of life with disease-free periods and eventually becoming a permanent condition and resulting in:Impairment of the ability of the digestive system to properly absorb fat, fat soluble vitamins (Vitamins A, D, E, and K) and other nutrients (malabsorption)Accumulation of toxic materials in the body
The initial symptoms associated with MDR3 deficiency may be:
JaundicePale stoolsIncreased liver size (hepatomegaly) which is noticeable during the neonatal period rather than at birth (congenital)Mild or moderate itching (pruritus) starting at about 9 months of age which can cause irritability and skin abrasions due to constant scratchingYellowing of the skin, mucous membranes and whites of the eyes (jaundice) that may be episodic and eventually become permanentAbnormally large liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly)
Other symptoms may include:
DiarrheaMalabsorption leading to:Difficulty growing and gaining weight (failure to thrive)Growth deficiencyBleeding episodes such as repeated nosebleeds and an abnormal susceptibility to bruising (vitamin K deficiency can lead to severe and even life-threatening problems with bleeding)Rickets due to vitamin D deficiency, a bone disorder with characteristic growth plate abnormalities and progressive softening of the bone structure that can result in a higher risk of fractures
MDR3 deficiency eventually progresses, rapidly or more slowly, ranging from the neonatal period to before adulthood and can cause serious life-threatening complications including:
High blood pressure of the vein of that carries blood from the intestines to the liver (portal hypertension)Scarring of the liver (cirrhosis)Liver failure
Additional symptoms that may affect people with MDR3 deficiency include:
Development of gallstones, also known as cholelithiasis, which can cause obstruction and/or inflammation of the gallbladder (cholecystitis), resulting in cramping pain in the upper abdomen, fever and jaundiceIntrahepatic gallstone disease (development of stones within the liver itself, which is different than the typical situation where the stones develop in the gallbladder) and is an uncommon problem, but is specific to MDR3 deficiency and may result in:Recurrence of biliary symptoms after a surgery removing the gallbladder (cholecystectomy) because the gallstone disease is intrahepatic, i.e., the bile duct injury is located mostly inside the liver and not in the gallbladder
Blood tests show an increased gamma-GGT, a liver enzyme, abnormal liver function tests and increased bile acids.
Although many cases of MDR3 deficiency occur during infancy or childhood, some people with variants in theABCB4gene do not develop symptoms until young adulthood or middle age. For example, some adults may develop jaundice and scarring of the liver (fibrosis or cirrhosis) during middle age. In some cases, the liver disease may look like sclerosing cholangitis, a disease often seen in individuals with inflammatory bowel disease.
Some adults with variants in theABCB4gene develop a specific type of cholesterol gallstone disease known as low phospholipid associated cholelithiasis (LPAC). LPAC syndrome symptoms start before age 40 and may include:
Inflammation of the gallbladderInflammation of the bile ductsIntrahepatic gallstone disease with recurrence of biliary symptoms after cholecystectomy because the gallstone disease is intrahepatic and not in the gallbladderInflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis)
Some females with variants in theABCB4gene may develop a condition known as intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP). This condition is characterized by symptoms that develop during pregnancy, usually the third trimester:
CholestasisItchingJaundice
These symptoms resolve without treatment (spontaneously) after the pregnancy (postpartum). Generally, females who develop ICP do not have symptoms before pregnancy and do not develop chronic liver damage.
It is important to note that individuals with MDR3 deficiency might have different health problems during their life due to the various MDR3 deficiency diseases.

