MECP2 Duplication Syndrome

synonyms:
trisomy Xq28Xq28 duplication syndrome

overview:
Summary
MECP2duplication syndrome is a rare genetic neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by a wide variety of symptoms including low muscle tone (hypotonia), potentially severe intellectual disability, developmental delays, recurrent respiratory infections, speech abnormalities, seizures, and progressive spasticity, a condition characterized by muscle stiffness that is worsened with movement and can be associated with involuntary muscle spasms. Additional symptoms can occur.MECP2duplication syndrome is caused by the duplication of genetic material on a specific region on the X chromosome (Xq28). This region includes theMECP2gene and typically several adjacent genes. In most affected individuals, theMECP2duplication is inherited in an X-linked manner; in rare cases, the duplication may occur randomly for no apparent reason (de novo duplication). The disorder predominantly affects males, but females who carry the duplication on one X chromosome (heterozygotes) may exhibit some signs of the disorder. Rarely, females can develop a severe form of the disorder similar to males
Introduction
One of the first descriptions in the medical literature of this disorder as a distinct neurological entity was by Lubs et al. in 1999. The discovery that microduplications involving theMECP2gene on the X chromosome cause a distinct neurological disorder (now known asMECP2duplication syndrome) was first reported in the medical literature in 2005. Mutations of theMECP2gene are known to cause Rett syndrome, a neurological disorder that primarily affects females. These disorders are sometimes grouped together asMECP2-related disorders.

symptoms:
MECP2duplication syndrome is characterized by a wide variety of symptoms. Although researchers have been able to establish a clear syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about the disorder is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified patients, the lack of large clinical studies, and the possibility of other genes influencing the disorder hamper physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Parents should talk to their children’s physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
One of the initial signs ofMECP2duplication syndrome may be feeding difficulties during the first few weeks of life likely resulting from diminished muscle tone (hypotonia). Affected children may also experience difficulty swallowing, gastroesophageal reflux and excessive drooling. Affected children will often fail to gain weight or grow at the expected rate for age and gender (failure to thrive) and may be at risk of aspiration, however, some infants experience no recognized problems in the newborn (neonatal) period and concern is not raised until other developmental milestones are missed.
Children withMECP2duplication have moderate to severe intellectual disability and experience delays in attaining developmental milestones including sitting and crawling. Consequently, walking is also delayed and, in some cases, individuals develop an unsteady, uncoordinated gait. This abnormal gait can result in the development of exaggerated inward curvature of the lower spine (lumbar hyperlordosis). As affected individuals grow older, about half may experience neurological regression that ultimately results in the loss of previously acquired skills such as the ability to walk. In many cases the onset of regression is linked to onset of epilepsy.
The majority of affected individuals do not develop the ability to talk. Some individuals may be able to speak a few words during early childhood or have a limited use of speech, but frequently this ability is progressively lost during adolescence. Most affected individuals have better receptive language skills (i.e. understanding what is said to them). Rarely, some boys do retain the use of speech into adulthood.
In many affected children, hypotonia may progress to spasticity, a condition that is generally defined in the medical literature as an abnormal increase in muscle tone or stiffness of affected muscles. Spasticity can be associated with muscle spasms, increased deep tendon reflexes, and fixed joints (contractures). Spasticity affects the legs more severely and, over time, mild to severe contractures of the hips, knees and ankles may develop. A contracture is a condition in which a joint becomes permanently fixed in a bent (flexed) or straightened (extended) position, completely or partially restricting the movement of the affected joint.
Up to half of individuals develop recurrent seizures (epilepsy) in childhood or adolescence. However, the true prevalence of seizures by adulthood may be higher. In some individuals, seizures may not respond to treatment (refractory) and the onset and severity of seizures may correlate with neurological deterioration (e.g. loss of speech, hand use, and ambulation). Seizure types that have been reported in individuals withMECP2duplication syndrome include head/neck and trunk drop attacks, absence seizures, myoclonic seizures, and generalized or secondarily generalized tonic-clonic or simply tonic seizures (once known as grand mal seizures).
Some individuals withMECP2duplication syndrome experience dysfunction of the immune system, which causes them to be prone to recurrent infections such as respiratory tract infections. Affected individuals may develop recurrent pneumonia that is sometimes severe requiring mechanical ventilation. Middle ear infections (otitis media) and sinusitis are also common. Additional infections have been reported including meningitis or urinary tract infections. Recurrent infections can cause life-threatening complications, and are a major contributing factor for reduced life-expectancy.
Many individuals withMECP2duplication syndrome meet formal criteria for diagnosis with an autism spectrum disorder due to poor expressive language skills, abnormal social affect, and restricted/repetitive behaviors. Mood disorders such as anxiety sometimes occur.
Affected individuals often have clinically significant constipation. Bladder dysfunction has also been seen. According to some reports, affected individuals may have chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction (CIP), a condition characterized by abnormalities affecting the involuntary, coordinated muscular contractions (peristalsis) that propels food and other material through the digestive system. Symptoms may develop due to obstruction of the small bowel and can include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, abdominal swelling and constipation. Ultimately, normal nutritional requirements cannot be met leading to unintended weight loss and malnourishment. The acute onset of GI symptoms such as abdominal pain, unusual distension, or vomiting warrants urgent medical evaluation as it can precede life-threatening complications.
Individuals withMECP2duplication may have distinctive facial features including an abnormally flat back of the head (brachycephaly), underdevelopment of the middle of the face (midface hypoplasia), ear anomalies, large ears, deep-set eyes, prominent chin, pointed nose, and an abnormally flat bridge of the nose.
Additional findings have been reported in some children withMECP2duplication syndrome including some degree of growth retardation. Early in life, head size appears to be normal, but as the boys get older, some might develop abnormally small head circumference (microcephaly).  However, large head circumference (macrocephaly) has also been observed, and overall these are not consistent features of the syndrome.
Some boys have underdeveloped (hypoplastic) genitalia. Affected males may experience failure of the testes to descend (cryptorchidism) and have the urinary opening located on the underside of the penis (hypospadias) rather than at the end.
AFFECTED FEMALESAlthoughMECP2duplication syndrome is primarily associated with males, females can develop mild symptoms of the disorder or, rarely, a severe form of the disorder. Some researchers have noted that women who have a MECP2 duplication on one of their X chromosomes (heterozygote or carrier females) may be prone to developing neuropsychiatric features including depression, anxiety, and specific personality traits. In addition, recent reports have identified women (i.e., women with unfavorable X-linked inactivation) who developed some symptoms of the disorder including recurrent infections, poor speech development, or seizures.Rarely, females may have a genetic abnormality, known as a translocation, which involves the X chromosome and a non-sex chromosome (autosome). Females with this specific underlying genetic abnormality may develop a severe form of the disorder similar to that seen in males. For more information, on X-linked inactivation and translocations, see the Causes section below.

