Medulloblastoma

synonyms:
primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the posterior fossa

overview:
Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor in children. Medulloblastomas by definition occur in the cerebellum, which is the part of brain located at the base of the skull, just above the brainstem. The cerebellum is involved in many functions including coordination of voluntary movements (e.g., walking, fine motor skills) and regulating balance and posture. Medulloblastomas arise from primitive, undeveloped cells in the brain. Most medulloblastomas occur in infants and children. Less commonly, these tumors can develop in adults as well. Symptoms associated with a medulloblastoma include headaches in the morning that improve as the day goes on, recurrent vomiting and difficulty walking and with balance. Medulloblastomas can spread to other areas of the central nervous system. The exact cause of a medulloblastoma is unknown.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms associated with a medulloblastoma will vary from one person to another based upon the exact location and size of a medulloblastoma and whether the tumor has spread to other areas. Affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
The symptoms of medulloblastoma usually result from increased pressure within the skull (intracranial pressure). Medulloblastomas generally arise in or near the base of the skull, an area known as the posterior fossa. The posterior fossa contains the brainstem and the cerebellum.
Medulloblastomas typically involve the fluid-filled fourth cavity (ventricle) of the brain. The brain has four cavities called ventricles that are filled with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and joined by channels, through which CSF circulates. Because the tumor often fills the fourth ventricle, CSF circulation is obstructed, resulting in hydrocephalus. Hydrocephalus is a condition in which the accumulation of excess CSF in the brain causes a variety of symptoms, including repeated, often severe vomiting, lethargy and headaches that frequently occur in the morning and improve as the day goes on. Additional symptoms may include irritability, increased head size, and paralysis (paresis) of the muscles that help control eye movements (extraocular muscles).
Many infants and children with a medulloblastoma develop papilledema, a condition in which the optic nerve swells because of increased intracranial pressure. The optic nerve is the nerve that transmits impulses from the retina to the brain. Papilledema can cause reduced clarity of vision. Because many the symptoms associated with a medulloblastoma are nonspecific and often subtle, papilledema may the first sign that brings affected infants and children to the attention of a neurologist.
Children with medulloblastoma often have evidence of cerebellar dysfunction. Symptoms may include poor coordination, difficulty walking, and clumsiness (ataxia). Affected children may fall frequently and develop an unsteady, clumsy manner of walking (unsteady gait). They may tend to stand with their feet widely separated, stagger or sway when walking and easily lose their balance.
As a tumor grows or spreads, additional symptoms can develop. Such symptoms may include double vision (diplopia), rapid, jerky movements of the eyes (nystagmus), facial weakness, ringing in the ears (tinnitus), hearing loss and a stiff neck. Some children with double vision may tilt their heads in an effort align the two images.

