Megalencephaly-Capillary Malformation

synonyms:
macrocephaly-capillary malformationmacrocephaly-cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenitaMCAPM-CMM-CM syndromeM-CMTC

overview:
Summary
Megalencephaly-capillary malformation syndrome (MCAP), formerly known as macrocephaly-capillary malformation, is a complex disorder that involves many organ systems including the skin, blood vessels, connective tissue, brain and others, and that usually manifests at birth. i. Most affected individuals have a disproportionately large head and vascular malformations including capillary malformations on the skin of the midline face, trunk and limbs. These capillary malformations often show a lacy or reticulated pattern (resembling a net or web, and are sometimes termed “cutis marmorata”). Most children with MCAP have an enlarged brain (or megalencephaly) and other findings on brain MRI scans with associated neurological problems.
Introduction
Multiple terms have been used in the past for this syndrome. The earliest one was macrocephaly-cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita (M-CMTC) because the vascular lesions were believed to be consistent with CMTC. However, careful examination of the skin in these children revealed that the vascular lesions are not CMTC but rather capillary malformations (described below), and so the syndrome was accurately renamed to “macrocephaly-capillary malformation syndrome” (or M-CM). Recently, the name was modified from this latter term to “megalencephaly-capillary malformation” (or MCAP, in short) because the term “macrocephaly” refers to a large head due various causes, whereas “megalencephaly” is a more specific and accurate term that refers to the truly enlarged brain present in this syndrome.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of MCAP vary greatly from one person to another. Some individuals may develop milder symptoms, while others have more serious complications and it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Families of affected children should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific features, associated symptoms and discuss their medical management and overall prognosis.
Growth abnormalities
The vast majority of infants born with MCAP have an abnormally large head (or megalencephaly) at birth that tends to be progressive, and maybe associated with a large body size at birth (i.e., somatic overgrowth or macrosomia). In most infants with body overgrowth birth, the overgrowth tends to either stay stable, decrease or normalize with age, and some may experience growth deficiency after birth. Infants and children may also display an asymmetric growth pattern, which ranges from one side of the body being clearly larger than the other (frank hemihypertrophy), to more subtle asymmetries of the body.
Vascular abnormalities
As newborns, children with MCAP have distinctive skin lesions that may be scattered over the trunk, limbs, and midline face. These skin findings are most often a specific type of vascular malformation known as capillary malformations. Capillaries are tiny blood vessels that form a fine network throughout the body connecting arteries and veins and are responsible for the exchange of various substances such as oxygen between cells and tissues. When abnormally widened (dilated) or malformed, these distinctive skin lesions appear. The most common location is the midline face (on the forehead, or above the upper lip), in which case the term nevus flammeus (or more commonly “Salmon patch”) is used. These facial lesions occur in a significant number of healthy children. Therefore their presence alone does not establish the diagnosis of MCAP. And while they may fade as children with MCAP grow older, they can persist to variable degrees. Other commonly seen lesions include cutis marmorata, which are generalized capillary malformations that may range from subtle lesions resembling the common marbled appearance of the skin of Caucasian infants to more recognizable lesions that persist. Finally, some children have infantile hemangiomas that may occur anywhere on the body. These may also persist in some children and, rarely, occur in internal organs (e.g., liver, spleen as well).
Brain abnormalities
Besides megalencephaly, children with MCAP may develop abnormal widening of the sac-like spaces (ventricles) of the brain that contain cerebrospinal fluid (or ventriculomegaly). Excessive accumulation of fluid may lead to hydrocephalus, one of the potentially serious complications of this syndrome. Furthermore, enlargement and herniation of the cerebellar tonsils (or a Chiari malformation) may occur which may also lead to hydrocephalus and brainstem compression. Given these two potentially serious complications of this syndrome, it is recommended that children are regularly monitored for symptoms related to hydrocephalus and cerebellar tonsillar herniation, such as headaches, lethargy, breathing abnormalities, and recurrent vomiting.
Additional structural abnormalities of the brain have been reported in MCAP including cerebellar/cerebral asymmetry, abnormalities in the development of the cerebral cortex (cortical dysplasia), and white matter abnormalities. One particularly common type of cortical malformation in MCAP is polymicrogyria (PMG), which refers to abnormally small and numerous folds of the cortical surface.  The corpus callosum (a midline structure that joins the two cerebral hemispheres) is usually twice as thick as normal.
Given all of these brain abnormalities, children with MCAP are at greater risk than the general population of developing associated neurological abnormalities including developmental delay and neurocognitive impairment (ranging from mild to severe), seizures and tone abnormalities.
Digital abnormalities and other physical features of MCAP syndrome
Infants with MCAP commonly have webbing of the digits (or syndactyly) that may involve the 2nd-3rd and 4th fingers or toes. Other physical abnormalities include a prominent forehead (frontal bossing), extra fingers and toes (polydactyly), loose (hyperelastic) skin, and loose joints (joint laxity). Secondary to abnormal growth, affected infants may also experience unequal development of the face and legs (facial and limb asymmetry). In rare cases, congenital heart defects, abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias), and genitourinary abnormalities may occur.

