Megaloblastic Anemia

synonyms:
constitutional megaloblastic anemia with severe neurological diseaseDHFR deficiencydihydrofolate reductase deficiency

overview:
Megaloblastic anemia is characterized by unusually large, structurally abnormal blood cells (megaloblasts) that do not function normally. Bone marrow, the soft spongy material found inside certain bones, produces the main blood cells of the body – red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets. All three cell lines may be affected in megaloblastic anemia. Anemia is a condition characterized by low levels of circulating red blood cells. Red blood cells are released from the marrow into the bloodstream where they travel throughout the body delivering oxygen to tissue. A deficiency in healthy, fully-matured red blood cells can result in fatigue, paleness of the skin (pallor), lightheadedness and additional findings. Megaloblastic anemia has several different causes – deficiencies of either cobalamin (vitamin B12) or folate (vitamin B9) are the two most common causes; dihydrofolate reductase deficiency is another more uncommon cause. Vitamin B12 and vitamin B9 play an essential role in the production of red blood cells. This disease can be diagnosed based on laboratory tests or characteristic findings when tissue is viewed under microscope.

symptoms:
In most patients, megaloblastic anemia develops slowly, and affected individuals may not have any apparent symptoms (asymptomatic) for many years. Symptoms common to anemia usually develop at some point and may include fatigue, paleness of the skin (pallor), shortness of breath, lightheadedness, dizziness and a fast or irregular heartbeat. The specific symptoms present in each individual can vary greatly.
Additional common symptoms include aches and pains, muscle weakness and difficultybreathing (dyspnea). Individuals with megaloblastic anemia may also develop gastrointestinal abnormalities including diarrhea, nausea and loss of appetite. Some affected individuals may develop a sore, reddened tongue. These abnormalities may result in unintended weight loss. Mild enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly) and a slight yellowing of the skin or eyes (jaundice) may also occur.
Megaloblastic anemia resulting from cobalamin deficiency may also be associated with neurological symptoms, presenting as tingling or numbness in the hands or feet. Additional symptoms develop over time including balance or gait problems, vision loss due to degeneration (atrophy) of the nerve that transmits impulses from the retina to the brain (optic nerve) and mental confusion or memory loss. A variety of psychiatric abnormalities have also been reported in individuals with cobalamin deficiency including depression, insomnia, listlessness and panic attacks. The spectrum of potential neuropsychological symptoms associated with cobalamin deficiency is large and varied.
In rare cases of cobalamin deficiency, neurological symptoms may occur before the characteristic findings of anemia. Folate deficiency is generally considered not to result in neurological symptoms, although some recent research suggests that, in rare cases, it may cause some neurological symptoms.
Symptoms of megaloblastic anemia due to dihydrofolate reductase deficiency are currently under investigation. The onset of symptoms for this type of megaloblastic anemia may start to appear in infants (1-23 months) and young children (2-11 years).

