Meier-Gorlin Syndrome

synonyms:
MGSear, patella, short stature syndromemicrotia, absent patellae, micrognathia syndrome

overview:
Summary
Meier-Gorlin syndrome (MGS) is a rare genetic disorder. The main features are small ears (microtia), absent or small kneecaps (patellae) and short stature. MGS should be considered in children with at least two of these three features.
There are other features of MGS that may include various skeletal differences, early feeding difficulties and poor weight gain. In addition, unique features of the head and face may be present including a small mouth with full lips, small size of the head (microcephaly) and/or small jaw bones (micrognathia).
People with MGS usually have normal intellectual ability and a normal lifespan.
MGS is usually inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern but can be autosomal dominant in some families.
Introduction
MGS was first reported by Meier in 1959 and Gorlin in 1975. Since then about 67 patients have been described with MGS.

symptoms:
The main clinical features of MGS are small ears, kneecap abnormalities and short stature. These features can be seen at birth and are discussed in more detail below.
People with MGS can have small or absent outer ears (microtia). The ears can also be low-set and/or unusually formed. They may have narrower or absent ear canals which could affect their hearing.
The kneecaps may be small or even missing. This may cause an unstable knee joint which could lead to chronic knee pain.
Short stature is due, in part, to the slow growth that can occur before and after birth in babies with MGS. As a result, these babies have low birth weight and can have feeding difficulties that result in a slower development and short stature.
This syndrome has a range of symptoms with severity anywhere from mild to severe. The following symptoms are associated with MGS, but not everyone diagnosed with MGS will have all of these symptoms.
Skeletal DifferencesPeople with MGS may have differences in their bone development. These may include slender, missing, or unusually shaped ribs with slender arm and leg bones. Elbows can be dislocated, collar bones can be hook-shaped and/or long bones can have flat ends. There have been some patients with an absent or abnormally shallow depression on the upper arm bone located where the bone meets the shoulder. There have also been patients with detachment of cartilage and bone tissue from the surface of a bone, unusually extended joints, and abnormally stiff joints that may lock in position. Specifically, hands can have the fifth finger be abnormally bent, and/or one or more fingers may be permanently flexed.
Facial FeaturesIn addition to those mentioned above, facial features can include a triangular face, an arched roof of the mouth and/or droopy eyelids. Facial features may include full lips and a narrow nose with a small jaw and mouth.
Life SpanMost people with MGS have a normal life expectancy. The oldest documented adult is a 65-year-old woman. The lifespan of those with MGS may depend on the severity of the symptoms experienced by each person.
Intellectual and Motor DevelopmentMost people with MGS have normal intelligence and learning ability. Mental ability and motor coordination is normal or borderline normal. Some affected children show delays in attaining developmental and speech milestones.
GrowthGrowth after birth can be delayed during the first year of life with normal growth afterwards. However, due to this delay, people with MGS do not catch up to their peers and tend to be shorter in stature.
FeedingFeeding problems have been seen in the majority of those with MGS during infancy and young childhood. These problems can be due to acid reflux which may need further medical intervention such as medication.
RespiratoryLikely due to their small stature, people with MGS can have breathing difficulties. Some report problems with releasing the air from their lungs, which will likely need medical intervention. Breathing difficulties can include coughing and wheezing due to weak lung structure. The weak structure and small size of the lungs can lead to recurrent infections in childhood. These infections tend to disappear after childhood.
Sexual DevelopmentIn some boys with MGS, the testes may not descend into the scrotum (undescended testes). Some boys have an abnormal location of the urinary opening on the underside of the penis (hypospadias). Both of these concerns can be treated with surgery.
Some girls with MGS may have underdeveloped breasts after reaching puberty. Some women with MGS have a small uterus. Some women with MGS have been reported to have many cysts on their ovaries. The impact of MGS on pregnancy is not well understood. However, there is a documented case of a woman with MGS having successful pregnancies, though the babies were born premature.
Both males and females with MGS tend to have sparse or absent underarm hair while pubic hair growth is normal.

