MELAS Syndrome

synonyms:
Mitochondrial Myopathy, Encephalopathy, Lactic Acidosis, Stroke-Like EpisodMyopathy, Mitochondrial-Encephalopathy-Lactic Acidosis-Stroke

overview:
MELAS (Mitochondrial Encephalopathy, Lactic Acidosis, and Stroke-like episodes) syndrome is a rare disorder that begins in childhood, usually between two and fifteen years of age, and mostly affects the nervous system and muscles. The most common early symptoms are seizures, recurrent headaches, loss of appetite and recurrent vomiting. Stroke-like episodes with temporary muscle weakness on one side of the body (hemiparesis) may also occur and this can lead to altered consciousness, vision and hearing loss, loss of motor skills and intellectual disability. MELAS is caused by mutations in mitochondrial DNA and in one patient, this syndrome has been associated with mutations in a nuclear gene, POLG1.

symptoms:
Symptoms of MELAS syndrome usually begin between the ages of two and fifteen years, but delayed onset cases have also been reported between fifteen and forty years and late onset cases after forty years.  In approximately 75 percent of cases, onset of the disorder is before the age of 20 years.  Symptoms and physical findings associated with MELAS syndrome vary greatly between affected individuals in the same family and between different families.  The distinguishing feature in MELAS syndrome is the recurrence of stroke-like episodes. It is currently thought that the deficiency of a compound called nitric oxide in the small blood vessels of the brain may be responsible for the stroke-like episodes. Short stature and hearing loss may be present and fatigue and difficulty tolerating exercise may be early symptoms.
People with MELAS syndrome have an accumulation of lactic acid in the blood (lactic acidosis), that can lead to vomiting, abdominal pain, fatigue, muscle weakness and difficulty breathing. This accumulation of lactic acid has also been noted in the spinal fluid and in the brain. In some cases, affected individuals will experience a slow deterioration of intellectual function (dementia), and/or a diminished ability to communicate by speech, writing, and/or signs (aphasia). Individuals with MELAS syndrome may also have episodes of confusion and hallucinations often due to a preceding fever (febrile illness) and/or headache. Less common symptoms include involuntary muscle spasms (myoclonus), impaired muscle coordination (ataxia), cardiomyopathy, diabetes mellitus, depression, bipolar disorder, gastrointestinal problems and kidney problems.

