Meleda Disease

synonyms:
Keratosis Palmoplantaris Transgradiens of SiemensMal de Meleda

overview:
Meleda disease is an extremely rare inherited skin disorder characterized by the slowly progressive development of dry, thick patches of skin on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet (palmoplantar hyperkeratosis). Affected skin may be unusually red (erythema) and become abnormally thick and scaly (symmetrical cornification). Affected children may also exhibit various abnormalities of the nails; excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis) associated with an unpleasant odor; and/or, in some cases, development of small, firm raised lesions (lichenoid plaques). The range and severity of symptoms may vary from case to case. Meleda disease is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.

symptoms:
Meleda disease is an extremely rare inherited skin disorder that is usually obvious shortly after birth.  Initially, affected infants may have unusually red skin on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet (palmoplantar erythema).  The affected skin then becomes abnormally thick, yellowish-brown, and scale-like (hyperkeratosis).  These skin lesions are usually present on both sides of the body (bilateral) on the same respective areas (symmetrical palmoplantar keratosis).  As the child grows older, these patches may spread to involve the entire hand or foot.  Eventually, the wrists, forearms, and knees may also become involved.  In some cases, with advancing age, the skin on the chest and abdomen may also become dry, scaly, and cracked.  Excessively dry skin may cause pain and discomfort.
Individuals with Meleda disease may also have unusually red skin around the mouth (perioral erythema).  In addition, affected children exhibit various abnormalities of the nails (nail dystrophy).  The nails may become excessively hard and thick (pachyonychia); “spoon-shaped” (koilonychia); or “hooked” (onychogryphosis) in appearance.  In some cases, affected individuals may also have excessive hair growth on the hands or feet.
Some individuals with Meleda disease may exhibit small, firm raised skin lesions (lichenoid plaques) in areas affected by hyperkeratosis.  In addition, in most cases, affected individuals may exhibit excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis) that may be associated with an unpleasant odor.  Additional features associated with Meleda disease may include abnormal webbing (fusion) of the fingers and/or toes (syndactyly), abnormal shortening of the fingers and toes (brachydactyly), and/or a grooved, cracked tongue (lingua plicata).

