Melkersson-Rosenthal Syndrome

synonyms:
Melkersson syndromeMROSMRSorofacial granulomatosis

overview:
Summary
Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome (MRS) is a rare neurological disorder characterized by recurrent, long-lasting swelling of the face (edema), particularly of one or both lips (granulomatous cheilitis), facial muscle weakness (palsy) and deep grooves on the tongue (fissured tongue). Most affected individuals will have only one or two symptoms, while some may present with all three. MRS can affect individuals of all ages. The onset of symptoms is more frequent in young adulthood, but can occur well into adulthood. It is estimated that MRS occurs in 0.08% of the general population. There is no cure for MRS, but symptoms can be treated with anti-inflammatory agents, antihistamines, corticosteroids and in some cases surgery.

symptoms:
Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome is defined by recurrent swelling (edema) of various facial features such as the upper lip, lower lip, one or both cheeks, eyelids, or rarely, one side of the scalp. It is also characterized by recurrent muscle weakness or paralysis (palsy) in the face and deep grooves or cracks (fissures) in the tongue. Affected individuals usually present with only one or two symptoms. It is estimated that about 8-18% of all patients present with all three symptoms.
The first episode of edema may resolve in a few hours or days, but swelling may be more severe and last longer in subsequent episodes and in some people can become permanent. The enlarged lips may appear cracked and discolored and can be painful. The edema resembles angioedema; rapid swelling caused by an accumulation of fluid, but tends to be more persistent and resistant to antihistamine treatment. Edema associated with MRS may also lead to the development of scar tissue (fibrosis) of the affected tissues. Edema is the most common feature, is often considered the characteristic symptom of MRS and may be the first or only symptom present.
A fissured tongue is defined as grooves on the tongue measuring about 2mm (0.07 in) deep and 15mm (0.6 in) long. A fissured tongue is seen in 30-80% of those affected by MRS and may be present at birth. It may lead to secondary infections, enlargement (hypertrophy) of the tongue, loss of taste buds, or an itching/burning sensation (dysesthesia). Salivary gland secretion may also be reduced. Although associated with MRS, a fissured tongue is also present in about 0.5-5% of the general population and may be familial or hereditary.
Facial muscle weakness and paralysis (facial palsy) occurs in 30-90% of those affected with MRS. It usually occurs after the first few episodes of edema but it can sometimes be the first and only symptom. In 13-50% of affected individuals, facial palsy is associated with facial edema. The facial weakness or paralysis can be on one side (unilateral) or both (bilateral) and resolves initially, but can become permanent. As the disease progresses, the duration of facial palsy may increase. Some individuals may also experience paralysis of other muscles in the head and neck associated with different cranial nerves. Children with recurrent facial palsy should be evaluated for underlying MRS. Recurrent facial palsy is observed in about 10% of all people with MRS.
Individuals affected by MRS have also reported additional symptoms that include migraines, headaches, tinnitus or sudden deafness, dizziness, dry mouth, facial pain, difficulty swallowing, dry eyes, blurred vision, diarrhea, and excessive tearing. Non-neurological symptoms of MRS may also include inflammation of the intestines (diverticulitis) and inflammation of the eyes (uveitis).

