Melnick Needles Syndrome

synonyms:
Melnick-Needles osteodysplastyMNSosteodysplasty of Melnick and Needles

overview:
Summary

Melnick-Needles syndrome (MNS) is a rare genetic disorder of bone characterized by skeletal and craniofacial abnormalities with a specific facial appearance. The skeletal abnormalities include bowing of long bones, s-curved leg bones, ribbon-like ribs and a hardening of the skull base, as well as spine deformities. The typical facial features include prominent, protruding eyes, full cheeks, an extremely small lower jaw and a hairy forehead. The condition may affect many bones of the body causing deformities and often short stature. Regular evaluations as well as surgical treatment may be needed to manage symptoms. MNS is thought to follow an X-linked dominant pattern of inheritance and is usually caused by a new change (mutation) in theFLNAgene.

symptoms:
MNS is a congenital condition, meaning it is present from birth. However, different members of the same family can have differences in the severity of their symptoms. Due to this variability, individuals may vary in their age at the time of diagnosis.
Individuals with MNS have a particular facial appearance with prominent, widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), full cheeks, small facial bones and an unusually small lower jaw (micrognathia). The skull may be slow to develop and the way in which individuals with MNS bring their teeth together (bite) may be abnormal. They may also have misaligned teeth or a partial absence of teeth (oligodontia).
The upper arms and the last bones in the fingers (distal phalanges) may be shorter than normal. One of the short bones of the arm (radius) and of the leg (fibula) may be bowed. The distal (farthest from the body) ends of the long bone of the arm (humerus) and of the two short bones of the leg (tibia, fibula) may be flared. The connection between the long bone of the leg (femur) and the hip may be misaligned (coxa valga), causing an unusual walking pattern (gait).
Individuals with MNS may also have a relatively small chest cavity (thoracic cage) with irregular ribbon-like ribs, a short collarbone (clavicle) and narrow shoulders. The lower part of their chest has a hollow shape (pectus excavatum). The vertebrae may be longer than normal. Spinal abnormalities, like an abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis), have been reported. Part of the pelvis (ilium) may also be flared. Short stature is often seen.
Occasionally, dislocation of the hip may occur. Other abnormalities may also be noted. For example, the tube that runs from the kidney to the bladder (ureter) may be abnormally narrow, which can lead to urine retention and kidney problems. There may also be problems with heart structure (congenital heart defects) and high blood pressure in the lungs (pulmonary hypertension).
Individuals with MNS may develop joint disease (osteoarthritis) in the back and/or hip in later years. The shape of the pelvis in females may make normal childbirth difficult for them. Individuals with MNS may be unusually susceptible to respiratory infections.
Intellectual development is normal in individuals with MNS. Some individuals with MNS may have hearing loss.
MNS is more severe and may be lethal in males. While it is lethal in most males during pregnancy or shortly after birth, there are case reports of males with typical features of MNS in their childhood-adolescent years. In these reports, the males were born to healthy parents and were the first in their families to show symptoms. Abnormalities seen in males with MNS include bulging eyes, protrusion of internal organs through the abdominal wall (omphalocele) and major skeletal abnormalities.

