Melorheostosis

overview:
Melorheostosis is a rare and progressive disease characterized by thickening or widening (hyperostosis) of the outer layers of the bone (cortical bone).
Melorheostosis affects both bone and soft tissue growth and development. This disorder is benign (noncancerous), but it often results in severe functional limitation; chronic pain; joint contractures and/or stiff muscles, tendons or ligaments and limb, hand, or foot deformities.
Melorheostosis can be an isolated disorder or can be part of several genetic syndromes.

symptoms:
Melorheostosis usually affects a single arm or leg (segment of the appendicular skeleton) and rarely affects both sides of the body. This condition is usually restricted to the inside (medial) or outside (lateral) of the bones. The disease can also affect the axial skeleton: pelvis, sternum, ribs and, more rarely, the spine and skull. Symptoms may progressively worsen over time. Signs and symptoms of melorheostosis may include:
Irregular bone growth, including cortical thickening and “dripping candle wax” appearance on x-ray images (this sign appears as irregular hyperostosis of the cortical bone which looks like melted wax flowing down one side of a candle)Limb-length discrepancy (when one leg or arm is shorter than the other leg or arm)Soft tissue abnormalities including:Shortening of tendons and ligamentsAbsent or abnormal musclesCalcium buildup in tissues (subcutaneous calcification)Joint swelling and contractures leading to malformed or immobilized jointsLimited range of motionPain and stiffnessSwelling (edema) of the legs and arms (extremities)Vascular anomaliesNerve compression from bone injuries (less common but serious)
In children, the most obvious symptom is the limb-length discrepancy with deformed joints and joint contractures.
In adults, symptoms of pain, joint stiffness and progressive deformity are more evident.
Melorheostosis has a chronic course. The severity of onset and symptoms varies greatly in children and adults but in general, symptoms begin in young children and may even manifest in the first days of life. About 50% of people affected with melorheostosis will develop symptoms by age 20.
Complications are related to the extension of the injury to the adjacent soft tissues and to the bone deformity and damage of the bone structure. The risk of tissue cells becoming cancerous (secondary malignant transformation) has also been reported.

