Menetrier Disease

overview:
Menetrier disease is a rare disorder characterized by massive overgrowth of mucous cells (foveola) in the mucous membrane lining the stomach, resulting in large gastric folds. The most common symptom associated with Menetrier disease is pain in the upper middle region of the stomach (epigastric pain). The cause of Menetrier disease is unknown.
There is considerable confusion and contradiction in the medical literature regarding disorders involving large gastric folds. The name Menetrier disease is often erroneously used to describe any condition with large gastric folds or as a synonym for giant hypertrophic gastritis (GHG). However, Menetrier disease is not a true form of gastritis. A diagnosis of Menetrier disease should be reserved for individuals with large gastric folds due to overgrowth of mucous cells. There is minimal or no stomach inflammation in Menetrier disease. Because inflammation is minimal or not present, Menetrier disease is classified as a form of hyperplastic gastropathy and not as a form of gastritis. Some researchers believe that Menetrier disease and GHG may be variants of the same disorder or different parts of one disease spectrum.

symptoms:
The symptoms of Menetrier disease may vary from case to case. Some individuals may not exhibit any symptoms (asymptomatic). The most common symptom is pain in the upper middle region of the stomach (epigastric pain). Less frequent reported symptoms include nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. In some cases, weight loss and profound loss of appetite (anorexia) may also occur.
An additional variable finding sometimes associated with Menetrier disease is the loss of protein from the circulation into the gastrointestinal tract (protein-losing gastropathy) such as the loss of the protein albumin (hypoalbuminemia). Protein loss may be severe in some cases. Protein loss may result in fluid accumulation (edema), especially in the legs.
Gastrointestinal bleeding has also been reported in some cases of Menetrier disease usually as a result of erosions or ulcers in the stomach lining. Acid secretion by the stomach is often markedly decreased (hypochlorhydria) or absent. Excess mucous secretion in the stomach may also occur.
Some researchers believe that individuals with Menetrier disease have a greater risk of developing gastric cancer than the general population has. However, other researchers do not believe this to be proven with certainty.  In some series, there has been an association between Menetrier disease and ulcerative colitis.

