Meningitis, Bacterial

synonyms:
Bacterial MeningitisPyogenic Meningitis

overview:
Bacterial Meningitis is a central nervous system disease caused by certain types of bacteria. Meningitis is characterized by inflammation of the membranes (meninges) around the brain or spinal cord. Inflammation can begin suddenly (acute) or develop gradually (subacute). Major symptoms may include fever, headache, and a stiff neck, sometimes with aching muscles. Nausea, vomiting and other symptoms may occur.

symptoms:
Bacterial Meningitis in adults and children is often preceded by respiratory illness or a sore throat.  Most forms of bacterial meningitis are acute.  In its acute form, the disorder is characterized by sudden fever, headache, a stiff neck, and vomiting.  Adults may become seriously ill within 24 hours. In children, the course of the infection may be even shorter.
Symptoms among older children and adults may progress from irritability through confusion, drowsiness, and stupor, possibly leading to coma. Dehydration is common.  Other symptoms may include chills, sweating, weakness, loss of appetite, or inability to tolerate bright light (photophobia).  Later symptoms may include hydrocephalus (accumulation of fluid in the brain cavity), paralysis of one side of the body (hemiparesis), hearing loss, or other neurological abnormalities.
Among infants between 3  months and 2 years of age, fever, refusal of feedings, vomiting, irritability, and convulsions usually occur.  A high- pitched cry, and a bulging or tight soft spot (fontanel) on the crown of the head (where the parts of the still unhardened bones join) may also occur. Since the incidence of Meningitis is highest among this age group, any unexplained fever needs to be investigated.  Cerebral fluid may accumulate just inside the tough outer membrane covering the brain (subdural effusions) after several days.  Typical signs of Meningitis include seizures, a persistent fever, and an enlarging head size.  A brain abscess or subdural pus accumulation may also occur.  Water accumulating in the brain (hydrocephalus), deafness and slowed mental and physical development are possible effects of Bacterial Meningitis on the central nervous system.
A neonatal form of Bacterial Meningitis in newborn babies up to 4 weeks old may be caused by infections in parts of the body other than the brain or spine.  Some cases may arise from complications occurring at birth.  The disorder is characterized by subtle and nonspecific signs such as jitteriness, interrupted breathing (apnea), vomiting, diarrhea, and a yellowish skin color (jaundice).  Usually signs of infection elsewhere in the body (e.g. middle ear infection) are also present.  The cerebrospinal fluid can be tested for a definite diagnosis.
Bacterial Meningitis due to Group B pneumococcus bacteria may be present in the first 10 days of life, when it frequently accompanies a lung illness. Usually, however, this form of Meningitis occurs after 10 days of age as an isolated illness.  Other symptoms such as fever, drowsiness, and seizures may occur.

