Meningococcemia

synonyms:
Meningococcal DiseaseMeningococcemia-Meningitis

overview:
Meningococcemia is a rare infectious disease characterized by upper respiratory tract infection, fever, skin rash and lesions, eye and ear problems, and possibly a sudden state of extreme physical depression (shock) which may be life-threatening without appropriate medical care. There are two forms of meningococcemia. Fluminant meningococcemia develops very rapidly and is more severe than chronic meningococcemia, which has a waxing and waning course.

symptoms:
Meningococcemia is characterized by sudden intense headache, nausea, fever, vomiting, and skin rash.  The affected individual may first complain of an upper respiratory infection.  Chills may develop, then skin rash on the arms or legs and the trunk.  Diarrhea may also be present.  Later the rash may become widespread or develop into bleeding spots under the skin (petechiae, ecchymoses, or purpura).  There may be associated swelling, muscle pain, skin deterioration or gangrene in the arms and legs.  Pneumonia may also develop along with the other symptoms if the affected individual has a suppressed immune system.
In cases where meningitis occurs along with meningococcemia, the affected individual may have the symptoms listed above along with the combination of headache, confusion, stiff neck, and muscle pain from irritation of membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord (meningismus).  (For more information on this disorder, choose “Meningitis” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database).
Fulminant Meningococcemia is also known as Waterhouse-Friderichsen Syndrome and is the most severe form of the disorder.  The disease comes on very suddenly and the progression of the symptoms is very rapid.  In less than a few hours the affected individual may experience very high fever, chills, weakness, vomiting and severe headache.  A red rash appears on the arms and legs and spreads very quickly over the body including the eyes and nose.  In addition, the affected individuals blood pressure may drop dangerously, the fever may drop dramatically, and they may go into shock.  Without immediate medical treatment this disorder can be life-threatening.
Chronic Meningococcemia is a rarer form of the disease.  It is characterized by fever that comes and goes over a period of weeks or months. Muscle and joint pain with headache as well as a skin rash may also come and go.  This form of the disorder may also include an enlarged spleen.

