Meningococcal Meningitis

synonyms:
bacterial meningococcal meningitisepidemic cerebrospinal meningitis

overview:
Meningococcal meningitis is a form of meningitis caused by a specific bacterium known as Neisseria meningitidis. Meningitis is characterized by inflammation of the membranes (meninges) around the brain or spinal cord. This inflammation can begin suddenly (acute) or develop gradually (subacute). Symptoms may include fever, headache, and a stiff neck, sometimes with aching muscles. Nausea, vomiting and other symptoms may also occur. Skin rashes occur in about half of all individuals with meningococcal meningitis.
Meningococcal meningitis is still associated with a high mortality rate and persistent neurological defects, particularly among infants and young children. Meningococcal meningitis without antibiotic therapy is uniformly fatal.

symptoms:
Meningococcal meningitis is one of the three most common types of bacterial meningitis. The incubation period averages 3-4 days (range 1-10 days), which is the period of communicability. It progresses more rapidly than any other acute form of bacterial meningitis. Meningococcal meningitis involves the central nervous system. In adults and children it is often preceded by respiratory illness or a sore throat. In its acute form, the disorder is characterized by fever, headache, a stiff neck, nausea, vomiting and altered mental state such as confusion or coma. Adults may become seriously ill within hours. In children the course of the infection may be even shorter.
Meningococcal meningitis evolves when the bacteria, Neisseria meningitidis (N.meningitidis) progresses from initial adherence to the nasopharyngeal (nose and throat) mucosa to invasion of the deeper mucosal layers (the submucosa). These bacteria rapidly multiply, and can lead to a mild (subclinical) infection. However, in approximately 10-20% of cases, the N.meningitidis enters the bloodstream (meningococcemia). This systemic form of the disease, meningococcemia, usually precedes the development of meningococcal meningitis by 24-48 hours.
Meningococcemia is characterized by severe, widespread vascular injury, with evidence of circulatory collapse and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) Skin rashes occur in about half of all individuals with meningococcal meningitis. The rash is petechial (tiny, non-raised, purple-reddish lesions that do not blanch when pressed, and are the result of areas of intravascular bleeding.
Swelling or inflammation of the brain (cerebral edema or ventriculitis), or hydrocephalus (accumulation of fluid in the brain cavity) may also occur. Additional symptoms may include chills; sweating; weakness; loss of appetite; muscle pain (myalgia) of the lower back or legs; or inability to tolerate bright light (photophobia). (For more information on hydrocephalus, choose “hydrocephalus” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database).
Dehydration often occurs in individuals with meningococcal meningitis. In some cases, collapse of the blood vessels may lead to shock (Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome) when the meningococcus bacteria spread to the blood (septicemia). Later symptoms may include paralysis of one side of the body (hemiparesis), hearing loss, or additional neurological abnormalities.
The course of meningococcal meningitis is less predictable among infants between three months and two years of age. Fever, refusal of feedings, vomiting, irritability, and convulsions usually occur. A high-pitched cry and a bulging or tight soft spot (fontanel) on the crown of the head (where the parts of the skull’s still unhardened bones join) may also occur. Since the incidence of most types of meningitis is highest among this age group, any unexplained fever needs to be closely watched. Cerebral fluid may accumulate just inside the tough outer membrane covering the brain (subdural effusions) after several days. Warning signs may include seizures, a persistent fever, and an enlarging head size. A brain abscess or subdural pus accumulation may also occur. Water accumulating in the brain (hydrocephalus), deafness and slowed mental and physical development are possible consequences of meningitis.

