Meningitis

overview:
Meningitis is characterized by inflammation of the membranes (meninges) around the brain or spinal cord. The disorder can occur in three different forms: adult, infantile, and neonatal. This inflammation may be caused by different types of bacteria, viruses, fungi, or malignant tumors. Chemical reactions to certain injections into the spinal canal can also cause Meningitis. This inflammation can begin suddenly (acute) or develop gradually (subacute). Adult forms of Meningitis are characterized by fever, headache, and a stiff neck, sometimes with aching muscles. Nausea, vomiting and other symptoms may occur. Treatment with antibiotics is usually effective against the infection.

symptoms:
Meningitis in adults and children is often preceded by respiratory illness or a sore throat.  In its acute form, the disorder is characterized by fever, headache, a stiff neck, and vomiting.  Adults may become seriously ill within 24 hours.  In children, the course of the infection may be even shorter. Symptoms among older children and adults may progress from irritability through confusion, drowsiness, and stupor, possibly leading to coma. Dehydration often occurs, and collapse of the blood vessels may lead to shock (Waterhouse-Friderichsen Syndrome), especially when the Meningitis is caused by meningococcus bacteria which spreads to the blood (septicemia).  Paralysis of one side of the body (hemiparesis) is uncommon early in the course of Meningitis, but may occur later as a result of tissue death in the brain (cerebral infarction).  Meningitis may recur even after treatment with antibiotics.
Infantile Meningitis: The course of the disorder is less predictable among infants between 3 months and 2 years of age.  Fever, vomiting, irritability, and convulsions usually occur.  A high-pitched cry, and a bulging or tight soft spot (fontanel) on the crown of the head (where the parts of the still unhardened bones join) may also occur.  Since the incidence of Meningitis is highest among this age group, any unexplained fever needs to be closely watched. Cerebral fluid may accumulate just inside the tough outer membrane covering the brain (subdural effusions) after several days.  Typical signs of Meningitis include seizures, a persistent fever, and an enlarging head size. A brain abscess or subdural pus accumulation may also occur.  Water accumulating in the brain (hydrocephalus), deafness and slowed mental and physical development are possible effects of Meningitis on the central nervous system.
Neonatal Meningitis: Meningitis in newborn babies can begin during the first 4 weeks of life. It may be caused by infections in parts of the body other than the brain or spine.  Some cases may arise from complications occurring at birth.  The disorder is characterized by subtle and non-specific signs such as jitteriness, interrupted breathing (apnea), vomiting, diarrhea, and a yellowish skin color (jaundice).  Usually signs of infection elsewhere in the body (e.g. middle ear infection) are also present.  The cerebrospinal fluid can be tested for a definite diagnosis.
Meningitis due to Group B pneumococcus bacteria may be present in the first 10 days of life, when it frequently accompanies a lung illness. Usually, however, this form of Meningitis occurs after 10 days of age as an isolated illness.  Neonatal Meningitis is also characterized by symptoms such as fever, drowsiness, and seizures.

