Meningioma

synonyms:
meningeal tumor

overview:
Summary
A meningioma is a tumor arising from the meninges, which are membranes covering the brain and spinal cord. Excluding brain metastases from other organs, they are the most common intracranial tumor and are the most common primary brain tumor. They arise more commonly in women and in older individuals and develop in around 8 per 100,000 people each year. Compression of the brain and/or spinal cord by a meningioma can lead to symptoms such as headaches, seizures, vision loss, mental changes and weakness. They are mostly treated by surgical removal (resection), which might be combined with radiotherapy, especially if the location of the tumor is such that it is not entirely resectable. Radiation therapy alone can sometimes be used to treat small tumors.
Introduction
The term “meningioma” was coined by Dr. Harvey Cushing in 1922. Since that time, the understanding of meningioma has greatly improved and several subtypes have been identified. As of 2021, the World Health Organization (WHO) classification system changed to use of Arabic numbers for grading and specifying Central Nervous System (CNS) tumors as the 2021 version of WHO classification and recognizing meningioma as a single tumor type with 15 subtypes (ref). Meningiomas remain largely divided into three grades determined by histologic appearance. of The exception remains that grade 1 meningioma will be classified as grade 2 if brain invasion by the tumor is present. Most meningioma (80-85%) are benign tumors (grade 1), 15 to 18% are atypical (grade 2) and 1 to 3% are malignant (grade 3). High grade tumors can arise on their own (de novo) or result from the malignant progression of lower grade tumors.

symptoms:
Meningioma can occur at any age but tend to occur in older individuals; the median age at diagnosis is 65 years (meaning that half of diagnosed people will be over that age and the other half below). The potential symptoms of meningioma are variable and depend on the location of the tumor and the locations of the brain and spine that are compromised.
Parasagittal meningioma can lead to symptoms such as headaches, seizures, and limb weakness. Pressure inside the skull (intracranial pressure) might be increased and lead to swelling of the optic nerve (papilledema) and blurry vision. Other visual defects can also develop. Compression on the frontal lobe can lead to personality changes, decreased cognition, and lack of emotion and interest (apathy). Involvement of the cerebellum can lead to gait imbalance (ataxia), decreased coordination (dysmetria), and involuntary eye movements (nystagmus). Hearing loss can occur if the tumor is located at the junction between the cerebellum and a region of the brainstem known as the pons (cerebellopontine angle). A tumor located in the opening of the skull where the spinal cord connects with the brainstem (foramen magnum) can also lead to arm and leg weakness. Compression from a meningioma can also impair cerebrospinal fluid drainage and lead to accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid in the brain, a condition known as hydrocephalus (for more information on this disorder, choose “hydrocephalus” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database). About 10% of meningioma occur in the spine (spinal meningioma), most commonly in the thoracic portion. Symptoms associated with spinal cord lesions include difficulty walking, leg weakness and numbness, pain, and difficulty with urination and/or bowel movements.
As most meningioma are benign, survival rates of affected individuals are relatively high: more than 80% of patients survive more than 5 years, around 75% survive more than 10 years, and about 70% survive more than 15 years. Older age, male gender, poor baseline health and high grade tumors are associated with lower survival rates.
Lower grade meningioma that are completely removed surgically do not usually recur. However, some tumors cannot be removed completely due to their location and proximity to crucial structures. A rule of thumb for recurrence of an incompletely resected meningioma is that the rate of recurrence is 30, 60 and 90% at 5, 10 and 15 years, respectively. Higher grade tumors might recur even with apparent complete resection, most often within 2 or 3 years. Tumors that have already recurred have a higher chance of recurring again, usually within a shorter time interval. Metastases to the spine and other organs are rare in meningioma and are most commonly associated with grade 3 tumors.

