Merkel Cell Carcinoma

synonyms:
cutaneous neuroendocrine carcinomaMerkel cell skin cancerMCCneuroendocrine carcinoma of the skinMerkel cell cancer

overview:
Summary
Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a rare form of skin cancer. It is an aggressive type of cancer that can spread (metastasize) to other areas of the body. The exact, underlying cause of the disease is not known, but there are several factors, including environmental and immunologic ones, that contribute to the development of the disease. Treatment guidelines are rapidly evolving with new studies and treatment options. Clinical features, tests for diagnosis and treatment options are discussed below. MCC is characterized as a neuroendocrine carcinoma because it involves interaction between the nervous system and the endocrine system.

symptoms:
Merkel cell carcinoma most commonly affects regions of the skin that are exposed to the sun including the head/neck and arms, but it can also develop on other areas of the body that are not typically sun-exposed.
In most people, the first sign of Merkel cell carcinoma is a small bump (nodule) on the skin. This bump is usually firm and appears either skin-colored or red-purple. Sometimes, the nodule can have a shiny surface or be covered with small widened (dilated) vessels. It also tends to grow rapidly. Often, there are no symptoms associated with the nodule. Although uncommon for MCC, the abnormal growth can rip open (ulcerate) to form an open sore with crusting. The acronym ‘AEIOU’ can be used to note characteristic clinical findings. The acronym stands for: asymptomatic (no noticeable symptoms); expanding rapidly (within 3 months’ times); immune suppression; older than 50 years of age; and ultraviolet light-exposed area affecting a fair-skinned individual.
In some instances, lymph node(s) to which the primary lesion drains, can become enlarged (lymphadenopathy). This is a clinical indication (via palpation and/or imaging) that the disease has spread to the patient’s nearby (regional) lymph node bed. This can occur in patients who present with a primary skin lesion as well as in those who do not. Individuals affected by MCC without a primary tumor (no original skin lesion) tend to do better compared to patients with primary tumor as well aslymph node involvement because it is likely that their immune system was able to eliminate the primary lesion and are thus more likely to be able to eliminate small numbers of undetected MCC cells that may be present elsewhere in the body.
Larger MCC tumors are associated with moderately higher risk of recurrence and spreading to lymph nodes. However, even small MCC tumors carry about a 25% risk of spreading to nearby lymph nodes. Merkel cell carcinoma can also spread to other areas of the body, like the liver, bones, pancreas and other skin/body wall locations.

