MERRF Syndrome

synonyms:
myoclonic epilepsy associated with ragged red fibersMERRFFukuhara syndromemyoclonus epilepsy associated with ragged red fibersmyoencephalopathy ragged-red fiber disease

overview:
Summary
MERRF (myoclonusepilepsy withragged-redfibers) syndrome is an extremely rare disorder that appears in childhood, adolescence or adulthood after normal development early in life. MERRF syndrome affects the nervous system, skeletal muscles and other body systems. The distinguishing feature in MERRF is muscle jerks (myoclonus), consisting of sudden, brief spasms that can affect the arms, legs or entire body. Individuals with MERRF syndrome may also have seizures (generalized epilepsy), impaired ability to coordinate movements (ataxia), muscle weakness (myopathy), exercise intolerance and a slow decline of intellectual function (dementia). Decreased body height (short stature), vision problems (optic atrophy), hearing loss, heart disease of the heart muscles (cardiomyopathy) and abnormal sensation from nerve damage (peripheral neuropathy) are other common symptoms. Individuals with MERRF syndrome will also have abnormal muscle cells that appear as ragged red fibers (RRF) when stained and viewed microscopically.
MERRF syndrome is a mitochondrial disorder. Mitochondria are structures found in the cell that produce energy. Mitochondrial disorders can occur when the mitochondrial genetic material (mtDNA) has a genetic change (mutation) that prevents the mitochondria from carrying out their function. As a result, parts of the body like the brain and muscles may not work properly due to lack of energy. MERRF syndrome is caused by mutations in mtDNA and is inherited from the mother.
Introduction
MERRF syndrome was first reported in 1973 when a family was described with muscle jerks (myoclonus), seizures and abnormal muscle cells showing characteristic ragged red fibers (RRF). By 1988, 25 people had been identified with a similar collection of features. That same year it was determined that MERRF syndrome is caused by mutations in mitochondrial DNA, and two years later, in 1990, the first causal genetic mutation was discovered.
Today MERRF syndrome is typically diagnosed by a combination of clinical features (myoclonus, seizures, and ataxia) and RRF seen on muscle biopsy. However, not all individuals diagnosed with MERRF syndrome will have, or develop, the same symptoms. A molecular diagnosis of MERRF is made when a genetic mutation is identified in a mitochondrial gene that is known to be associated with the condition. A diagnosis of MERRF syndrome can help guide surveillance, treatment of symptoms and possibly aid in prevention of disease progression. A genetic diagnosis can also clarify risk to siblings, parents, extended family members and biological offspring, and can help in family planning.

symptoms:
Symptoms of MERRF syndrome can begin in childhood, adolescence or early adulthood after a period of normal early development. Signs, symptoms and physical findings associated with MERRF syndrome may vary greatly between affected individuals in the same family and between different families. The age of onset and how quickly the condition progresses can differ between individuals.
Brief, sudden, jerking muscle spasms (myoclonus) is usually the first symptom of MERRF syndrome followed by seizures (generalized epilepsy), impaired ability to coordinate movements (ataxia), muscle weakness (myopathy) and exercise intolerance. Decreased body height (short stature), hearing loss, decline of intellectual function (dementia) and altered sensation (pins-and-needles or pain) from nerve damage (peripheral neuropathy) are also common symptoms. Some individuals may have vision problems or vision loss, most commonly caused by degeneration of the optic nerve (optic atrophy). Vision impairment may also result from drooping upper eyelids (ptosis), progressive damage to the receptors that respond to light in the retina of the eye (pigmentary retinopathy) or weakness of the eye muscles (ophthalmoplegia). Heart problems may also arise, including heart disease of the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy) and problems of the heart rhythm (arrhythmia) such as Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. Occasionally, people with MERRF syndrome have benign fat cell tumors (lipomas) especially around the  neck, too much sugar in the blood (diabetes mellitus) and involuntary muscle stiffness (spasticity) along with other differences in reflexes and movement (pyramidal signs). People with MERRF syndrome frequently have an accumulation of lactic acid in the blood (lactic acidosis) which can cause vomiting, abdominal pain, decreased appetite, unusual sleepiness or fatigue, muscle pain or weakness and difficulty breathing.

