Mesenteric Panniculitis

synonyms:
sclerosing mesenteritismesenteric lipodystrophyretractile mesenteritis

overview:
Summary
Mesenteric panniculitis, also known as sclerosing mesenteritis, belongs to a spectrum of rare diseases of the fatty (adipose) tissue of the mesentery. Mesenteric panniculitis is characterized by fat degeneration and necrosis, chronic inflammation, and at times, scarring and fibrosis of fatty tissue within the mesentery. This inflammatory and at times progressive condition is most consistent with autoimmune disorders. There is currently limited understanding of the progression of events that lead to the development of mesenteric panniculitis.
The mesentery is a fold of tissue within the peritoneum that supports and attaches the small and large intestines to the walls of the abdomen. The mesentery contains fat, blood vessels, lymphatic tissue, lymphatic vessels and other forms of connective tissue. Anatomists previously considered it to be a fragmented collection of intra-abdominal connective tissue. Recently, the anatomy of the mesentery has been clarified and the mesentery has been found to represent a continuous organ that extends from the duodenojejunal flexure to the mesorectum. The portion of the mesentery that is adjacent to the small intestine is most often affected in mesenteric panniculitis. Although the exact cause of mesenteric panniculitis remains unknown, the disease has been associated with a variety of other conditions, including neoplasms, other autoimmune diseases and abdominal trauma.
Clinical symptoms of mesenteric panniculitis are highly variable. Some individuals have few or no noticeable symptoms; others may be greatly affected by a variety of complaints including abdominal pain, nausea/vomiting, bloating, early satiety, loss of appetite and diarrhea or constipation. Systemic symptoms, especially fatigue, commonly occur in patients with mesenteric panniculitis. A computerized tomogram (CT) or other imaging of the abdomen shows thickening of the mesentery, sometimes with lymph node enlargement. Due to its variable clinical presentation and rarity, the diagnosis of mesenteric panniculitis is often delayed. Tissue biopsy is required to secure the diagnosis of mesenteric panniculitis and rule out neoplastic infiltration of the mesentery. However, not every patient suspected of having the disease will require a biopsy. There is limited information on the natural history of mesenteric panniculitis, but a stable clinical course is generally anticipated. Due to the rarity of mesenteric panniculitis, there is little prospective data available on its treatment. Nonetheless, corticosteroids and other medications directed at lowering the degree of inflammation and other medications that improve symptoms are felt to be the mainstay of treatment for mesenteric panniculitis.
Introduction
Mesenteric panniculitis is a rare disorder that is part of a spectrum of diseases affecting the mesentery, a continuous organ that extends from the duodenojejunal flexure to the mesorectum that supports and attaches the intestines to the abdominal wall. Individuals with mesenteric panniculitis develop inflammation and necrosis of the fatty tissue of the mesentery, especially in the area of the small bowel. The condition progresses to cause chronic inflammation of the mesentery. In some patients, ongoing inflammation can result in scarring (fibrosis) of the mesentery.
Mesenteric panniculitis was first described in the medical literature in 1924 as “retractile mesenteritis”. Since that time, alternative names have been used to describe the condition including mesenteric panniculitis, retractile mesenteritis and mesenteric lipodystrophy. These names denote the predominant features of the disease process in the mesentery. Mesenteric panniculitis refers to the manifestation of the disease with a predominance of inflammation, sclerosing mesenteritis (or retractile mesenteritis) is the term that refers to a form of the disease with a predominance of fibrosis; and mesenteric lipodystrophy refers to disease with a histologic predominance of fat necrosis.
Emory et al. examined three entities (sclerosing mesenteritis, mesenteric panniculitis, and mesenteric lipodystrophy) and confirmed that there was a great deal of histologic overlap between the three entities and suggested that they are all manifestations of the same condition. The authors of this historic study also concluded that the most appropriate term for the process was “sclerosing mesenteritis” based on the presence of some degree of fibrosis. The authors also hypothesized that the condition might be a progressive process moving from lipodystrophy to mesenteric panniculitis to retractile mesenteritis. At present, mesenteric panniculitis is the most commonly used and recommended name for the condition. Overall, additional names that have been used for this disorder include mesenteric fibrosis, mesenteric sclerosis, liposclerotic mesenteritis, mesenteric Pfeifer-Weber-Christian disease, mesenteric lipogranuloma, xanthogranulomatous mesenteritis, inflammatory pseudotumor, retroperitoneal xanthogranuloma and isolated lipodystrophy.

symptoms:
In general, mesenteric panniculitis is a chronic, benign disorder with a favorable prognosis that occasionally resolves on its own (spontaneous regression). Nonetheless, symptoms of mesenteric panniculitis may be severe in some patients and can result in significant effects on quality of life. The clinical presentation of mesenteric panniculitis is highly variable. Some patients have few or no noticeable symptoms. The diagnosis of mesenteric panniculitis may be made incidentally following a CT scan of the abdomen, generally for the evaluation of abdominal pain. Symptoms of mesenteric panniculitis fall into two categories. Some symptoms, such as abdominal pain, are due to the mass-like effect of mesenteric inflammation, and potentially involvement of adjacent structures including the small intestine. The second group of symptoms occurs in the presence of chronic inflammation and may include weight loss, fever, and fatigue. Some affected individuals may develop complications such as small bowel obstruction or acute abdomen. Small bowel obstruction prevents the passage of food through the intestines and can cause a variety of nonspecific gastrointestinal symptoms as well as a nutrient malabsorption.
The most common symptom of mesenteric panniculitis is abdominal pain. The pain is generally located in the middle portion of the abdomen but can be present in other areas of the abdomen or pelvis as well. Other common symptoms include nausea, vomiting, early satiety, anorexia, fatigue, fever, unintended weight loss and altered bowel habits (either constipation or diarrhea). In some patients a tender mass may be detected in the middle portion of the abdomen mass. Abdominal distension from chylous ascites has also been described. A thorough examination to rule out peripheral lymphadenopathy or other signs of neoplasm is necessary in all patients.

