Mesenchymal Chondrosarcoma

overview:
Mesenchymal chondrosarcoma is an extremely rare, often aggressive form of cancer. It is an uncommon type of chondrosarcoma. Conventional chondrosarcoma is a form of bone cancer that arises from cartilage cells. Cartilage is the specialized tissue that serves as a buffer or cushion at joints. Most of the skeleton of an embryo consists of cartilage, which is slowly converted into bone. Approximately two-thirds of cases of mesenchymal chondrosarcoma affect the bones, especially the spine, ribs or jaws. The remaining cases occur in areas of the body other than bone (extraskeletal, that is, occurring in soft tissues like muscle and fat). Unlike conventional chondrosarcomas, mesenchymal chondrosarcomas occur with greater frequency in young adults. This form of cancer often spreads (metastasizes) to other areas of the body and can cause life-threatening complications.

symptoms:
The symptoms of mesenchymal chondrosarcoma may vary depending upon the exact location and progression of the tumor. Most mesenchymal chondrosarcomas arise in the bones of the jaw, spine or the ribs. However, the tumor can arise almost anywhere within the body. The arms and legs are also frequent sites of tumor development, especially the main bone of the thigh (femur). Approximately one-third of cases occur outside of bone, appearing as soft tissue masses and can affect the muscle or central nervous system
The specific symptoms associated with mesenchymal chondrosarcoma may be vague and nonspecific. Many individuals may develop pain and swelling in the affected area. Such vague symptoms can be present for a long time before a diagnosis is made. If a tumor grows large enough it can compress nearby structures and cause additional symptoms. For example, a tumor that compresses the spinal cord can cause paralysis, while a mesenchymal chondrosarcoma in the eye socket (orbit) can cause pain, swelling, visual disturbances and protrusion of the eyeball (exophthalmos).
Mesenchymal chondrosarcomas are an aggressive form of cancer that can spread (metastasize) to other areas of the body, especially the lungs, liver, lymph nodes and other bones and may cause life-threatening complications.

