Mesothelioma

synonyms:
malignant mesotheliomaMM

overview:
Summary
Mesothelioma is a rare form of cancer that affects the cells that make up the mesothelium. The mesothelium is the lining or membrane that covers and protects various internal organs of the body. The mesothelium is composed of two layers of specialized cells known as mesothelial cells. One layer directly surrounds the internal organs; the other forms a protective sac around thoracic and peritoneal organs. The most common form of mesothelioma affects the pleura, which is the membrane or sac that lines the lungs and chest cavity. Other common sites include the peritoneum, which is the membrane lining the abdominal cavity, and the pericardium, which is the membrane lining the heart (heart sac). Mesothelial tissue is also found in other areas of the body including the membrane covering the testicles (tunica vaginalis). The disorder most often occurs in older adults. Mesothelioma is often an aggressive form of cancer with a poor prognosis, with pleural mesothelioma patients having a median survival of only about 12-14 months with current therapies. Treatments are available, but are not effective for everyone.
Introduction
The term “cancer” refers to a group of diseases characterized by abnormal, uncontrolled cellular growth (e.g., mesothelial cells) that invades surrounding tissues and may spread (metastasize) to distant bodily tissues or organs via the bloodstream, the lymphatic system, or other means. Different forms of cancer, including mesothelioma, may be classified based upon the cell type involved, the specific nature of the malignancy, the tissues or organs affected, and the disease’s clinical course. Symptoms of mesothelioma vary depending upon the location, type and stage of the cancer. Approximately 70 to 80% of cases of mesothelioma result from exposure to asbestos. Symptoms of mesothelioma may not appear until up to 30 to 50 years after initial exposure to asbestos. However, after symptoms become apparent, mesothelioma may rapidly progress to cause life-threatening complications.

symptoms:
The symptoms of mesothelioma vary depending upon the location, type and stage of the cancer. Unfortunately, early in the course of the disease, many people have no symptoms, and the tumor can be difficult to see on X-ray examination.
In approximately 85% of patients, mesothelioma arises in the membranes surrounding the lungs (malignant pleural mesothelioma). A collection of fluid around the lung, termed a pleural effusion, may be present. Symptoms may include shortness of breath or difficulty breathing (dyspnea), chest pain, or a chronic cough due to pleural effusion. Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) can also occur, but is usually a late complication. A mass in the chest wall or unusual lumps of tissue under the skin of the chest may develop in some cases.
When the membrane surrounding the stomach is affected (peritoneal mesothelioma), symptoms may include unexplained weight loss, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, loss of appetite, low levels of circulating red blood cells (anemia), and abnormal accumulation of fluid (ascites) in the space (peritoneal cavity) between the two layers of the membrane (peritoneum) that lines the abdomen. Small bowel obstruction may occur, usually as a late complication of the disorder.
When the membrane surrounding the heart is affected (pericardial mesothelioma), heart rhythm abnormalities or low blood pressure may occur. Chest pain and breathing difficulties can also occur with pericardial mesothelioma.
Individuals with mesothelioma may also experience general symptoms including fever, weakness, night sweats, unexplained weight loss, and a general feeling of ill health (malaise).
In extremely rare cases, mesothelial tissue lining the testicles can give rise to mesothelioma. This tissue is part of the peritoneal mesothelium that extends into the scrotum.

