Metachromatic Leukodystrophy

synonyms:
MLDdiffuse brain sclerosismetachromatic leukoencephalopathyARSA deficiencyarylsulfatase A deficiency

overview:
Summary
Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) is a rare hereditary disease characterized by accumulation of fats called sulfatides. This causes the destruction of the protective fatty layer (myelin sheath) surrounding the nerves in both the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system. There are three types of MLD based on the age symptoms appear: late-infantile MLD, juvenile MLD, and adult MLD. All subtypes ultimately affect both intellectual and motor function. Symptoms vary by type but can include difficulty talking, seizures, difficulty walking, personality changes, and behavior and personality changes. MLD is caused by changes (mutations) in theARSAgene and, in rare cases, thePSAPgene.
Introduction
This condition is called metachromatic leukodystrophy because when viewed under a microscope, sulfatide accumulation in cells appears as granules that are colored differently than other cellular material (metachromatic). A leukodystrophy is a genetic disorder that disrupts myelination in the brain.

symptoms:
Each MLD subtype has specific symptoms and rate of progression. Each subtype is based on age of onset.
Over half of the children affected by MLD show symptoms in the first 3 years of life. This form is called late-infantile MLD. Often the first signs of disease are from demyelination of the peripheral nervous system and include difficulty walking.
Juvenile MLD (J-MLD) is less common and occurs in 20-30% of people with MLD. Onset is between 4 years old and sexual maturity, usually between 12 and 14 years of age. Often with J-MLD, the first signs include behavioral problems or new difficulty in school.
All forms of MLD are progressive. In late-infantile MLD, within months of the first symptoms, most children lose the ability to talk and walk. The progression in the juvenile and adult forms can occur over years to decades. Regardless of the subtype, last stage of the disease is often characterized by blindness, inability to move, unresponsiveness, and an inability to speak.

