Mevalonate Kinase Deficiency

synonyms:
MKD

overview:
Mevalonate kinase deficiency (MKD) is a rare genetic autoinflammatory disorder. Autoinflammatory syndromes are a group of disorders characterized by seemingly random or unprovoked episodes of inflammation generally due to an abnormality of the innate immune system. They are not the same as autoimmune disorders, in which the adaptive immune system malfunctions and mistakenly attacks healthy tissue.
Mevalonate kinase deficiency is a spectrum of disease, ranging from more mild to severe complications. Hyper IgD syndrome (HIDS) is part of this spectrum and is characterized by episodes or “attacks” of fever associated with other symptoms including joint pain (arthralgia), muscle pain (myalgia), skin rash and abdominal pain. Most episodes last several days and can repeat throughout life. The frequency of episodes and their severity vary greatly from one person to another. Mevalonate aciduria is a more severe form. In addition to symptoms associated with HIDS, mevalonate aciduria can cause growth deficiency before and after birth, neurological abnormalities and ocular problems. Sometimes, mevalonate aciduria can cause life-threatening complications in childhood. Mevalonate kinase deficiency is caused by changes (mutations) in theMVKgene.

symptoms:
Mevalonate kinase deficiency is a spectrum of disease that can range from milder symptoms to severe, even life-threatening complications. Affected individuals can fall anywhere along this spectrum and it is important to remember every person is unique and the disorder may affect them differently from how it affects another person.
The milder end of the spectrum, also known as hyper IgD syndrome, is more common and is characterized by recurrent episodes of unexplained fever. There is often an abrupt onset of fever with no associated infection. These episodes are accompanied by fatigue, chills, abdominal pain, swelling of affected lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy), a rash, joint inflammation (arthritis) and pain (arthralgia). Additional symptoms include nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, headaches, small ulcers in the mouth and abnormal enlargement of the liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly). The rash consists of reddish (erythematous) spots (macules) or bumps (papules). Some individuals have a cough and inflammation of the back of the throat (pharyngitis).
The specific symptoms present during an episode and their severity vary from person to person. For an affected individual, the severity of individual episodes also varies. Episodes usually last for three to seven days, but can be shorter or longer. The frequency of episodes varies greatly. Some individuals have an episode every month, some more frequently and others less frequently. The frequency of episodes may also increase or decrease during a person’s life. Between episodes, individuals with mevalonate kinase deficiency may not display symptoms, while others may experience fatigue, headaches or ulcers in the mouth. Joint and skin problems may persist for a short time after an episode ends.
Mevalonate kinase deficiency is often more severe in children. Affected children often have a high spiking fever that, in rare instances, can cause seizures. Children are also more likely to have an abnormally enlarged spleen (splenomegaly). Episodes occur more frequently in children than adults. Episodes of fever may be set off by minor “triggers” such as emotional or physical stress. In children, episodes can follow vaccination. Adults may have mood and psychiatric features including depression.
Less common symptoms include inflammation of conjunctiva, which is the mucous membrane that covers the front of the eye and lines the inside of the eyelids (conjunctivitis), inflammation of the middle layer of the eye (uveitis), and inflammation of the main nerve of the eye that sends impulses from the brain to the retina (optic neuritis). In rare instances, kidney (renal) problems may develop including benign (non-cancerous) tumors of the kidney called angiomyolipomas. Some people may be prone to developing infection, particularly pneumococcal infection. Additional findings that have been associated with this disorder include retinitis pigmentosum, an eye disorder in which abnormal pigmented materials builds up in the retina causing a decline in vision; inflammation of the lining of the colon (colitis), which can cause abdominal bloating and pain, a constant urge to have a bowel movement, dehydration, diarrhea, bloody stools, and fever; and disseminated superficial actinic porokeratosis (DSAP), which is a skin disorder causing dry patches of skin and small growths (papules), mainly on the arms and legs.
In rare instances, people with mevalonate kinase deficiency develop long-term complications including AA amyloidosis, joint contractures, and abdominal adhesions. AA amyloidosis can occur in many chronic inflammatory disorders and is characterized by the accumulation of amyloid proteins in the kidneys. This can lead to progressive damage and dysfunction of the kidneys. Joint contractures occur when a joint becomes fixed in a bent or extended position, completely or partially restricting the movement of the joint. Abdominal adhesions are abnormal bands of fibrous tissues that form in the abdomen and cause abdominal organs and tissue to stick together. They may not cause symptoms or can cause chronic abdominal pain.
The severe end of the spectrum, known as mevalonate aciduria, is characterized by episodes or fever and accompanying symptoms as described for the milder end of the spectrum. These episodes are usually more frequent and more severe. Affected infants and children may also have growth deficiency before and after birth, failure to grow and gain weight (failure to thrive), and distinctive facial features including widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), a large forehead (frontal bossing), long eyelashes, and a triangularly-shaped face. Some infants may have microcephaly, a condition where the circumference of the head is smaller than would be expected. They may also experience delays in reaching developmental milestones (developmental delays), delays in reaching milestones that require the coordination of muscular and mental activity (psychomotor delays), intellectual disability, problems with voluntary muscle control leading to poor coordination (ataxia), and seizures. Some infants have diminished muscle tone (hypotonia). Cataracts have also been reported. Children may be prone to developing infections. The severe end of the spectrum of mevalonate kinase deficiency can be severe enough to cause life-threatening complications in some instances.

