Microvillus Inclusion Disease

synonyms:
congenital familial protracted diarrheacongenital microvillus atrophyDavidson's diseasefamilial enteropathy, microvillusMVIDintractable diarrhea of infancy

overview:
Summary
Microvillus inclusion disease (MVID) is an extremely rare inherited intestinal disorder (enteropathy) that is typically apparent within hours or days after birth. The disorder is characterized by chronic, severe, watery diarrhea and insufficient absorption (malabsorption) of necessary nutrients due to incomplete development (hypoplasia) and/or degeneration (atrophy) of surface cells of the wall of the small intestine (e.g., hypoplastic villus atrophy, defective brush-border assembly and differentiation). Infants with MVID may have chronic diarrhea and malabsorption may result in severe dehydration, deficiency of necessary nutrients (malnutrition), a failure to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive), and/or disturbance of the body’s balance of acids and bases, which is essential in regulating the body’s composition of bodily fluids (acidosis). MVID is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
Introduction
MVID was first described in the medical literature in 1978.

symptoms:
MVID is characterized by severe, large amounts of watery diarrhea appearing at birth or within seventy-two hours. Symptoms of a rare late onset form may not occur until two or three months after birth. Diarrhea persists even after oral feeding is stopped and does not decrease with age. Diarrhea often worsens after feeding because of malabsorption of necessary nutrients. The diarrhea often results in life-threatening complications, specifically severe dehydration and metabolic acidosis, which may cause kidney failure, requiring the infant to be hospitalized. There may also be related weight loss, growth retardation and developmental delay.
Infants affected by this disorder require total intravenous hydration and total parenteral nutrition (TPN). TPN may be associated with an increased risk of developing blockage of the liver or bile ducts preventing the normal flow of bile (cholestasis) and liver failure. Liver disease and cholestatis can also occur independent of TPN due to the genetic defect in bile duct cells.

