Miller Syndrome

synonyms:
POADSGenee-Wiedemann syndromepostaxial acrofacial dysostosis

overview:
Summary

Miller syndrome, also known as postaxial acrofacial dysostosis, is a rare genetic disorder characterized by craniofacial malformations occurring along with abnormalities of the arms, hands and/or feet. Craniofacial abnormalities include underdevelopment of the cheekbones (malar hypoplasia); an abnormally small lower jaw (micrognathia); incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate); small, protruding, “cup-shaped” ears; and/or absence of tissue (colobomas) from the lower eyelids. Limb abnormalities may include incomplete development, webbing (syndactyly), and/or closure or absence of certain fingers and/or toes; and/or improper development and/or abnormal fusion of bones in the forearms (radioulnar synostosis), causing the forearms to appear unusually short. Additional physical abnormalities can occur in some cases. Intelligence is not affected. Miller syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern caused by mutations in theDHODHgene.

Introduction

Miller syndrome was first described in the medical field between 1969 and 1979 through several independent reports. The disorder is refereed by several names derived from some of the physicians who first reported the disorder including M. Miller, H.R. Wiedemann, and E. Genee. Some researchers believe that Miller syndrome represents a distinct entity under the broader term of “postaxial acrofacial dysostosis,” which would include other disorders with similar and overlapping craniofacial and limb abnormalities, but ultimately distinct symptoms.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms associated with Miller syndrome may vary from one person to another. Affected individuals may develop a variety of craniofacial and limb abnormalities. Most abnormalities are noticeable at birth.
Common craniofacial abnormalities include underdevelopment of the cheekbones (malar hypoplasia); an abnormally small lower jaw (micrognathia); incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate); narrowing of the back of the nasal cavity (choanal atresia); small, protruding, “cup-shaped” ears; and/or absence of tissue (colobomas) from the lower eyelids. Additional craniofacial findings can include a gap of missing tissue in the upper lip (cleft lip), a broad bridge of the nose, downward-slanting palpebral fissures (which means that the opening between the eyelids slants downward), partial or total absence of the eyelashes of the lower eyelids, and lower eyelids that are turned (inverted) outwards so that the inner surface is exposed (ectropion).
Micrognathia and choanal atresia may contribute to difficulty breathing and/or feeding difficulties. Some affected individuals develop hearing loss due to improper conduction of sound from the outer or middle ear to the inner ear (conductive hearing loss). Hearing impairment may cause speech development to be delayed when not treated.
Individuals with Miller syndrome also have various abnormalities affecting the arms and legs including absence or abnormality of either the fifth or both the fourth and fifth fingers of the hands and toes of the feet and, in some cases, the ulna and/or the fibula may be underdeveloped. The ulna is the forearm bone on the pinky side of the arm; the fibula is the outer and narrower long bone of the lower legs, thus the medical term “postaxial” which refers to fourth and fifth fingers or toes; as well as the ulna and fibula. This can cause the forearms and/or the lower legs to appear short. Additional symptoms can occur including webbing (syndactyly) of the fingers and toes, underdevelopment of the thumbs, and the formation of an abnormal bone or soft tissue connection between the ulna and the radius, two main bones of the forearm (radioulnar synostosis).
In some cases, additional symptoms develop including growth deficiency after birth (postnatal growth deficiency), a sunken breastbone so that the chest appears ‘scooped out’ (pectus excavatum), rib defects, and extra (accessory) nipples. Affected infants may have hips that dislocate easily and may potentially be dislocated at birth. Affected male infants may have undescended testicles (cryptorchidism).
Some individuals have kidney, gastrointestinal or heart abnormalities. Kidney abnormalities may include the backflow of urine from the bladder to the kidneys (kidney reflux). Gastrointestinal abnormalities can include abnormal positioning of the intestines (midgut malrotation) and narrowing of the opening that connects the stomach to the duodenum, the first part of the small intestine (pyloric stenosis). Heart defects can include ventricular septal defects (VSDs), which are also known as a ‘hole in the heart’. VSDs are characterized by an abnormal opening in the wall (septum) that separates the lower chambers of the heart (ventricles).

