Miller Fisher Syndrome

synonyms:
MFSFisher syndrome

overview:
Summary
Miller Fisher syndrome (MFS) is a rare, acquired nerve disease related to Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS). Features include weakness of the eye muscles causing difficulty moving the eyes; impaired limb coordination and unsteadiness; and absent tendon reflexes. It may develop into GBS with other features including facial, swallowing and limb weakness, as well as respiratory failure. MFS can affect both children and adults. It often occurs several days (up to four weeks) after a bacterial or viral illness. MFS is rare, affecting 1-2 people per million each year. It is an autoimmune disease, in which the immune system attacks the nerves. Specific treatment is available, but most patients recover within six months even without treatment. Very few patients have permanent neurological problems or relapse, and MFS is almost never life threatening.
Introduction
MFS is named after Dr. Charles Miller Fisher, a Canadian neurologist working at Massachusetts General Hospital. In 1956, he described three patients with ophthalmoplegia (eye muscle weakness), ataxia (incoordination) and areflexia (absence of tendon reflexes). He deduced that their disease shared features with Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) to which it is related. (For more information on GBS, seehttps://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/guillain-barre-syndrome/)

symptoms:
MFS has three defining features:
ophthalmoplegia (eye muscle weakness resulting in impaired eye movements and consequent double vision)ataxia (incoordination of the limbs)areflexia (absence of tendon reflexes)
These features typically develop rapidly over a few days. Some patients have weakness of the face, tongue and swallowing muscles as well. Others also develop weakness of the limbs and breathing muscles and are then considered to have GBS-MFS overlap syndrome. MFS often occurs several days or up to four weeks after an infection (especiallyCampylobacter jejuni,a diarrheal illness orHaemophilus influenzae, a respiratory infection).

