Mitochondrial Neurogastrointestinal Encephalopathy

synonyms:
MEPOPMNGIEMNGIE syndromemuscular dystrophy, oculogastrointestinalmyoneurogastrointestinal encephalopathy syndromePOLIP

overview:
Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE) is a rare multisystem disorder characterized by progressive degeneration of the muscles of the gastrointestinal tract causing gastrointestinal dysmotility, weakness of extra-ocular muscles causing drooping of the eyelids (ptosis) and restricted eye movements (ophthalmoparesis), degeneration of peripheral nerves causing altered sensation and weakness the distal arms and legs, and general wasting (cachexia). The specific symptoms associated with MNGIE vary from case to case and may include vomiting, nausea, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and numbness or sensations of pins and needles in the hands and feet. . Additional findings may occur in some cases. MNGIE is caused by changes (mutations) in the TYMP gene encoding thymidine phosphorylase (TP) and is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.
MNGIE patients also show changes (e.g. depletions, deletions, or point mutations) in the genetic material (DNA) of the mitochondria. Mitochondria, found by the hundreds within virtually every cell of the body, generate most of the cellular energy through the respiratory chain enzymes (complexes I-V), which convert electrons derived from sugars and fats into ATP, the energy currency of the cell. The genetic blueprints for essential components of the respiratory chain are mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Disorders due to mitochondrial dysfunction, often defects of the respiratory chain, are called mitochondrial disease. Because energy is essential for many tissue functions, mitochondrial diseases typically affect multiple organs of the body.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of MNGIE vary from case to case. Onset of symptoms is usually before 20 years of age, but may range from 5-60 years of age. MNGIE is characterized by a variety of gastrointestinal and neurological findings.
The most prominent symptom of MNGIE is progressive dysfunction of the muscles of the gastrointestinal tract (gastrointestinal dysmotility). Any portion of the gastrointestinal tract from the back of the throat (oropharynx) to the large intestine may be affected. The most common form of gastrointestinal dysmotility associated with MNGIE is small intestine hypomotility, in which the muscles of the intestinal walls fail to contract normally and generate the wave-like (peristaltic) motions required to push food through the digestive tract. Failure to push food through the intestines although no physical blockage is present is known as intestinal pseudoobstruction. When the muscles of the wall of the stomach are involved the condition is known as gastroparesis.
Individuals with MNGIE may develop a variety of gastrointestinal symptoms. The specific symptoms will vary from case to case, but may include vomiting, nausea, diarrhea, abdominal pain, a feeling of early fullness (premature satiety), stomach rumblings (borborygmi), and difficulty swallowing (dysphagia). Some affected individuals may also develop small sac-like protrusions (diverticula) of inner intestinal layer through the outer muscular wall of the small intestine.
The gastrointestinal symptoms associated with MNGIE may result in a variety of complications including bacterial overgrowth in the intestines and, less frequently, failure of the intestines to absorb nutrients during digestion (malabsorption). Consequently, affected individuals may develop weight loss, and the loss of tissue and muscle mass (cachexia). Most individuals with MNGIE are extremely thin and some individuals may have short statute.
The most common neurological symptoms associated with MNGIE are drooping of the upper eyelid (ptosis) because of weakness of muscles of the eyelid, weakness of additional muscles around the eye gradually restricting the movements of the eyes (ophthalmoplegia), hearing loss, and peripheral neuropathy, a condition in which there is damage or malfunction of the peripheral nervous system (i.e., the nerves outside the central nervous system). The symptoms of peripheral neuropathy vary greatly, but may include weakness of the muscles of the distal arms or legs or abnormal sensations such as tingling (paresthesias), burning or numbness. The legs are affected more often and earlier than the arms.
Individuals with MNGIE often exhibit destruction of the myelin sheath that covers nerve fibers in the brain (leukoencephalopathy). This clinical finding is usually not associated with symptoms (asymptomatic).

