Mitral Valve Prolapse Syndrome

synonyms:
Barlow SyndromeBillowing Mitral Leaflet SyndromeClick-Murmur SyndromeFloppy Valve SyndromeMitral Click-Murmur SyndromeMitral Leaflet SyndromeMVPMVPSSystolic Click-Murmur Syndrome

overview:
The mitral valve is the valve between the left upper and left lower chambers (left atrium and left ventricle) of the heart. Mitral valve prolapse syndrome (MVP) is a common condition in which one or both of the flaps (cusps) of the mitral valve bulge or collapse backward (prolapse) into the left atrium during ventricular contraction (systole). In some cases, this may allow leakage or the backward flow of blood from the left ventricle back into the left atrium (mitral regurgitation).
The exact underlying mechanism responsible for MVP remains unknown. In many affected individuals, the condition appears to occur in the absence of an associated disorder or syndrome (idiopathic). Evidence indicates that the condition is sometimes familial, suggesting autosomal dominant inheritance. In other cases, MVP occurs in association with certain inherited connective tissue diseases, other heart abnormalities, or other underlying conditions, disorders, or syndromes.
In many individuals with MVP, no associated symptoms are apparent (asymptomatic). However, in other cases, the condition may result in chest pain, abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias), fatigue, dizziness, and/or other symptoms and signs. MVP is often associated with a characteristic click and/or a subsequent delayed murmur that may be detected through use of a stethoscope during physical examination.

symptoms:
In many individuals with mitral valve prolapse syndrome (MVP), no symptoms are apparent (asymptomatic) and the condition is often nonprogressive.  However, others with MVP may develop fatigue, difficulty breathing (dyspnea) with exertion, awareness of the heart beat and a “pounding” or racing of the heart (palpitations), and abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias).  Additional signs may include lightheadedness, fainting episodes (syncope), abnormally low blood pressure upon standing (orthostatic hypotension), headaches, chest pain, and/or other symptoms and findings.
In rare cases, MVP may lead to heart failure or impaired ability of the heart to pump blood effectively to the lungs and on to the rest of the body due to severe mitral regurgitation; the formation of blood clots; transient ischemic attacks (TIAs) or stroke; and/or sudden potentially life-threatening complications.  (TIAs are characterized by temporary impairment of brain function due to brief interruptions of blood supply.  A stroke refers to localized death of brain tissue [cerebral infarction] due to lack of blood flow and insufficient oxygen supply to the brain.  TIAs or stroke may result from interruption of the brain’s blood supply by a blood clot carried in the bloodstream [embolism].)
Individuals with MVP associated with mitral regurgitation may have an increased risk of developing bacterial infections of the heart lining and valves (bacterial endocarditis).  (For further information, please see the “Standard Therapies” section of this report below.)

