Mixed Connective Tissue Disease

synonyms:
MCTDSharp syndrome

overview:
Mixed connective tissue disease (MTCD) is an uncommon systemic inflammatory rheumatic condition. MCTD is a specific subset of the broader category of rheumatic “overlap syndromes”, a term used to describe when a patient has features of more than one classic inflammatory rheumatic disease. These classic rheumatic diseases include systemic lupus erythematosus, polymyositis, scleroderma and rheumatoid arthritis. Individuals with an overlap syndrome may, but need not meet, complete diagnostic criteria for one (or more than one) classic rheumatic disease. MCTD is distinguished from other overlap syndromes by a laboratory result: MCTD patients have rheumatic overlap syndrome plus anti-RNP antibodies. Additionally, it has been proposed that the term “MCTD” be reserved for patients with clinical features that include at least one of the following “common manifestations”: Raynaud’s phenomenon, puffy fingers or swollen hands.

symptoms:
Individuals with MCTD have symptoms that overlap with those of two or more inflammatory rheumatic diseases. These diseases, in which autoimmunity, excess immune activation and inflammation are hallmarks, include systemic lupus erythematosus, polymyositis, scleroderma and rheumatoid arthritis. (For more information on these disorders, see the Related Disorders section of this report.) While inflammatory rheumatic diseases have at times been referred to as “connective tissue diseases”, this can cause confusion with other conditions which are characterized by biochemically abnormal connective tissues (such as Ehlers-Danlos syndrome or Marfan syndrome) in which autoimmunity, excess immune reactions and inflammation need not occur, and which are not part of MCTD.
A condition known as Raynaud’s phenomenon may precede the development of additional symptoms of MCTD. Raynaud’s phenomenon, which is seen also in over 95% of patients with scleroderma, is characterized by painfully cold fingers and toes with blue and/or white color changes caused by spasm of blood vessels in the hands and feet in response to cold or stress. It also occurs in approximately 90 percent of individuals with MCTD.
Pain in multiple joints (polyarthralgia) or inflammation of joints (arthritis) also occurs in the majority of affected individuals. Lupus-like skin inflammation in sun-exposed areas and hair loss are common, as are skin thickening changes on the fingers and face like those seen in scleroderma. Muscle weakness due to inflammation (myositis) of the muscles can also occur, typically primarily affecting large centrally-located muscle groups. Additional frequent symptoms include hand swelling and fatigue.
Dysfunction of the esophagus occurs in at least half of individuals with MCTD. The esophagus is the tube that carries food from the mouth to the stomach. Esophageal trouble most often manifests as heartburn (gastroesophageal reflux) and difficulty swallowing solid foods. Nearly half of individuals with MCTD may develop clinically significant lung involvement, typically with a delay of months to years after the condition first emerges. MCTD lung disease may lead to breathing (respiratory) difficulties caused either by high blood pressure in the lungs (pulmonary hypertension) or by causing lung inflammation and scarring in and around the lung air sacs (interstitial lung disease).
Heart (cardiac) involvement is less common in MCTD than lung problems, but can be serious when it occurs.
Kidney (renal) disease occurs much less often in MCTD than in lupus (10 percent of individuals with MCTD) and is often mild in MCTD.
Neurologic abnormalities are noted in approximately 10 percent of individuals with MCTD. The neurologic findings of aseptic meningitis (an inflammation of the lining surfaces that surround the brain and spinal cord, without an associated infection) or trigeminal neuralgia (an impairment in the function of one of the major cranial nerves that supplies sensory and motor functions to parts of the face) have been observed to occur with increased frequency in MCTD.
Low levels of circulating red blood cells (anemia) and a reduction in the white blood cell count (leukopenia) occur in 30 to 40 percent of patients. Enlargement of the lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy), enlargement of the spleen (splenomegaly), enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly) and intestinal involvement may also occur in some patients.
Although medications may be required to help control MCTD, the condition has been reported to eventually enter spontaneous sustained remission in as many as 40% of patients.
Patterns of organ targeting have been reported that suggest disease subtypes. Some patients have more vascular manifestations, and have higher risk for pulmonary hypertension. Some patients have more myositis manifestations and have higher risk for interstitial lung disease. Some patients with more classic rheumatoid arthritis manifestations may have a lower risk of major internal organ damage.

