Molybdenum Cofactor Deficiency

synonyms:
combined deficiency of sulfite oxidase, xanthine dehydrogenase and aldehyde oxidaseencephalopathy due to sulfite oxidase deficiencycombined molybdoflavoprotein enzyme deficiencycombined xanthine oxidase and sulfite oxidase and aldehyde oxidase deficiencydeficiency of molybdenum cofactor

overview:
Summary
Molybdenum cofactor deficiency (MoCD) is a rare genetic condition that affects the brain and nervous system. There are three subtypes of MoCD, each due to changes (pathogenic variants) in different genes. MoCD, type A is due to variants in theMOCS1gene, MoCD type B is due to variants theMOCS2gene and MoCD, type C is due to variants in theGPHNgene. MoCD type A accounts for about half of the cases of MoCD, while most of the other cases are type B. Type C has only been diagnosed in a couple of families.
MoCD type A and type B have an early-onset form and a later-onset form. The three subtypes of MoCD are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern in families.
All of the symptoms of MoCD are due to the buildup of sulfite in the body, a chemical toxic to the brain and nervous system.
Early-onset MoCD
The symptoms of early-onset MoCD type A or B are identical and begin in the first few weeks after birth. Type C is associated with severe, early-onset disease. The first signs of brain damage include frequent seizures that don’t improve with anti-seizure medication and feeding difficulties. In a short time, babies with MoCD start having muscle spasms and stiffness and develop an exaggerated startle reaction. Some of the other features include loss of consciousness, trouble breathing and loss of vision. Some children with MoCD have characteristic facial features that are sometimes described as coarse. Without treatment, many children with this condition die in infancy or early childhood.
Late-onset MoCD
The late-onset form of MoCD, types A and B, tends to have milder symptoms beginning later in infancy or even adulthood. The first symptoms typically appear after or during an illness in the first year of life. These include uncontrollable muscle movements, weakness and developmental delay. Seizures are less common in the late-onset form. Symptoms may go away and return with another illness. Late-onset MoCD affects people differently and in some individuals the symptoms get better with time, while others have symptoms that get progressively worse. There have been very few individuals diagnosed with the late-onset form of MoCD, so the course of this condition is not well understood. Treatment is based on managing the symptoms.
Fosdenopterin (Nulibry) is a medication approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) that can help improve survival in babies with MoCD type A.

symptoms:
Early-onset MoCD
The early-onset form of MoCD is the most common and considered the classic form. Both MoCD types A and B include an early-onset form with symptoms appearing in the first two weeks after birth. The first symptoms include seizures that are difficult to treat and feeding difficulties. Soon after, infants with MoCD develop muscle spasms that cause the spine and neck to arch, rigid or stiff muscles, muscle weakness and an excessive startle reaction to noise or touch. About two thirds of infants with MoCD have characteristic facial features, including a prominent forehead, flattened nasal bridge, thick lips and widely spaced eyes. Over time, brain damage builds up causing brain and head growth to slow. This results in a head size that is smaller than average (acquired microcephaly). Children who survive past one year of age have severe developmental and intellectual delay, eye abnormalities, including blindness and displacement of the lens of the eye and frequent seizures. Most children die by age 2-3 due to complications of their condition. The few individuals that have been reported with MoCD type C have been described as having a similarly severe form of this condition.
Late-onset MoCD
The late-onset form is less common, and has also been described in patients with both MoCD type A and MoCD type B. The symptoms of the late-onset form can be different from person to person. Some individuals have mild symptoms, while others develop severe brain damage. Symptoms of the late-onset form typically begin before age 2, and often occur during, or right after an illness. These can include involuntary muscle movements, low muscle tone, stiffness, changes in thinking and developmental issues. Displacement of the lens of the eye (ectopia lentis) can occur in older individuals. Seizures are less common than in the early-onset form. In some individuals, the symptoms will get better, but may come back with another illness. Because there have not been many individuals described with late-onset MoCD, the long-term outlook is not well known.

