Mosaic Trisomy 22

synonyms:
mosaic trisomy chromosome 22trisomy 22 mosaicism

overview:
Summary

Mosaic trisomy 22 is a rare chromosomal disorder in which chromosome 22 appears three times (trisomy) rather than twice in some cells of the body. The term “mosaic” indicates that some cells contain the extra chromosome 22, whereas others have the normal chromosomal pair. Mosaic trisomy 22 appears more commonly in females. The range and severity of associated symptoms and findings may vary. The characteristic features of mosaic trisomy 22 typically include prenatal and postnatal growth failure or delay, asymmetrical development of the two sides of the body (hemidystrophy) and congenital heart defects. While some patients with mosaic trisomy 22 have abnormal cognitive development, normal development has been documented for some children.

symptoms:
The symptoms and physical findings associated with Mosaic trisomy 22 may depend on the percentage and distribution of cells containing the extra 22nd chromosome. However, the disorder is often characterized by (1) growth and developmental delays, (2) asymmetric body development, and (3) congenital heart diseases.
Intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) and postnatal growth failure were found in more than 70% patients with mosaic trisomy 22. While many affected children have developmental delay, up to 40% of all reported patients have normal developmental outcomes. It has been shown that there was no correlation between the percentage of trisomic cells and the severity of developmental delay.
In many affected individuals, there is asymmetric development of two sides of the body, causing the body to appear dissimilar from one side to the other (hemidystrophy). For example, one leg may appear shorter than the other. In addition, in many individuals with hemidystrophy, there is associated hearing loss affecting one ear (unilateral hearing impairment).
Patients with mosaic trisomy 22 often have congenital heart defects. Atrial septal defects and ventricular septal defects are the most common cardiac malformations for these patients. In the atrial septal defect, a “hole” in the wall separating the two top chambers (atrias) of the heart remains open after birth. This allows oxygen-rich blood to enter the oxygen-poor chamber (right atrium). On the other hand, the ventricular septal defect is a “hole” in the wall separating the two lower chambers (ventricles) of the heart.
Abnormal physical features are frequently seen in patients with mosaic trisomy 22. Some common presentations include skin fold of the upper eyelid covering the inner corner of the eye (epicanthic folds), dents/dimples located near the front of the external ear (preauricular pits) and flat nasal bridge. Other features include underdeveloped middle phalanx of 5th finger (mesobrachydactyly or clinodactyly), abnormal palmar flexion creases and kidney (renal) malformations. A few patients may have linear pigmentary changes along Blaschko lines.
A small subset of female patients may have abnormal development of the ovaries (ovarian dysgenesis, streak ovaries). The ovaries are essential glands for female reproductive cells (eggs) and certain female hormones. Therefore, ovarian dysgenesis may be associated with delayed or failed development of secondary sexual characteristics during puberty (e.g., breast development, the appearance of pubic hair, menstruation) and infertility.

