Mowat-Wilson Syndrome

synonyms:
MWS

overview:
Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) is a rare genetic disorder that may be apparent at birth or later in childhood. MWS is characterized by intellectual disability, distinctive facial features and seizures. Other congenital anomalies occur in some individuals and can include a gastrointestinal disease known as Hirschsprung disease (40-50% of individuals) in which a narrowing of a portion of the colon is present, eye (ophthalmologic) defects, heart (cardiac) defects, kidney (renal) abnormalities, male genital abnormalities and short stature. Some affected individuals may not be recognized until childhood or adulthood, especially when Hirschsprung disease is not present. MWS is caused by a disease-causing variant in theZEB2gene that is usually not inherited from a parent.

symptoms:
MWS is associated with a range of physical symptoms as well as intellectual disability. Most people with MWS have a severe intellectual disability, though a small number have milder features and only moderate intellectual disability. People who have MWS typically have a distinctive facial appearance, absent or severely limited speech and often have seizures. Some physical problems may present at birth or infancy. These include the intestinal disorder Hirschsprung disease in about half, problems with development of the kidneys and male genitalia (hypospadias), congenital heart defects, eye problems and absence of the area of the brain which connects the two cerebral hemispheres (agenesis of the corpus callosum). Later features may include small head size (microcephaly) and short stature. MWS specific growth charts now are available to track growth. Chronic constipation may occur even in those who do not have Hirschsprung disease. Constipation in people with MWS needs investigation in view of the possibility of very short segment Hirschsprung disease.
The distinctive facial appearance of people with MWS is the most consistent feature of this condition and can be recognized by an experienced medical specialist. Common features include a high forehead, broad eyebrows that are wide apart centrally, widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism) that are large and deep set, uplifted ear lobes with a central depression, relatively small nose (in babies) with a prominent rounded nasal tip, prominent portion between nostrils (columella), open mouth with M-shaped upper lip and a prominent but narrow and triangular pointed chin. These features may not all be obvious in babies. Some facial features become more apparent with time, so a diagnosis of MWS is easier to make in older children.
Children with MWS make their developmental progress (such as sitting, crawling, and walking) at a significantly slower rate than average. Speech is often delayed or absent, with few exceptions (see mild Mowat-Wilson syndrome). Comprehension is usually better than speech ability and children may communicate in non-verbal ways such as signing or use of a communication device. They usually have a happy demeanor and smile frequently.
Seizures are common, occurring in approximately 80% of individuals. Seizures can be difficult to control in childhood but are not usually a major problem in adulthood. A small subset of individuals will have electrical status epilepticus during sleep (ESES) that can lead to loss of some developmental and physical skills if it continues untreated.
Although a variety of congenital abnormalities may occur in infants with MWS, it is important to note that affected infants will not have all the anomalies associated with the condition. One congenital abnormality is Hirschsprung disease, a gastrointestinal condition characterized by absence of certain nerve cell bodies (ganglia) in the smooth muscle wall within a region of the large intestine (colon). As a result, there is absence or impairment of the involuntary, rhythmic contractions that propel food through the GI tract (peristalsis). Symptoms of Hirschsprung disease include constipation, vomiting, loss of appetite, bloating or swelling (distention) of the abdomen, abnormal accumulation of feces within the colon and widening of the colon above the affected segment (megacolon). Hirschsprung disease can eventually cause diarrhea, dehydration and failure to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Short stature is common in MWS, although some people have normal stature.
One rare finding is lack of a spleen, an organ that helps to fight certain types of infections. All individuals with MWS should be checked at the time of diagnosis to see if they have a spleen. This can be done through an ultrasound of the abdomen. Blood testing can sometimes also suggest that the spleen is absent.
Mild Mowat-Wilson Syndrome
A subset of individuals with MWS has been identified who have mild features. Such individuals may have no malformations or may have fewer facial features, sometimes making the diagnosis harder to make based on physical findings alone. Additionally, such individuals may have intellectual disability that falls in the mild to moderate range, as opposed to the severe range. Speech capabilities are more advanced, with some able to speak in short sentences by mid-childhood. Individuals who have mild MWS typically have either a missense variant somewhere in theZEB2gene or a more typical truncating variant that occurs near the end of in theZEB2gene, leading to a protein that has decreased function as opposed to absent function (see Causes section).

