Moyamoya Disease

synonyms:
moyamoya syndrome

overview:
Moyamoya disease is a progressive disorder that affects the blood vessels in the brain (cerebrovascular). It is characterized by the narrowing (stenosis) and/or closing (occlusion) of the carotid artery inside the skull, a major artery that delivers blood to the brain. At the same time, tiny blood vessels at the base of the brain open up in an apparent attempt to supply blood to the brain distal to the blockage. These tiny vessels are the “moyamoya” vessels for which the disease was named. Inadequate blood supply then leads to reduced oxygen delivery to the brain, and it is this oxygen deprivation that causes the signs of moyamoya. One of the symptoms is typically stroke, which results in paralysis of the face, arms or legs, loss of speech, etc., or temporary loss of neurologic function of body parts or speech (transient ischemic attacks, or “TIA”). Other symptoms that may result include headaches, visual disturbances, developmental delay, and seizures. Approximately 10-30% of cases of moyamoya in Asian countries have a genetic cause. Patients with this arteriopathy that occurs either on a familial or idiopathic basis are said to have moyamoya disease. Patients in whom the artery changes occur in association with another process such as sickle cell disease or Down syndrome are said to have moyamoya disease. In this report, we use the term “moyamoya disease” as shorthand for both forms.

symptoms:
Although moyamoya disease may occur at any age, there are two peak incidence periods –between the ages of five and ten years in children, and between 30 to 50 years in adults. Children with moyamoya disease may present with a variety of symptoms, but most present with those related to reduced brain blood supply, including stroke, TIAs, headaches, seizures, involuntary movements or occasionally progressive developmental delay.
Although adults with moyamoya also present with signs and symptoms of brain ischemia, they also have a greater tendency to suffer intracranial hemorrhage than children, presumably due to rupture of the tiny moyamoya blood vessels possibly in the setting of higher blood pressures seen in adulthood.

