Mucopolysaccharidosis Type I

synonyms:
alpha-L-iduronidase deficiencyIDUA deficiencyMPS I

overview:
Summary

Mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS I) is a rare genetic disorder that affects many parts of the body (multisystem). Children with MPS I are described as having either a severe or attenuated (meaning reduced) form of the disorder based on age of onset, severity of symptoms, rate of disease progression and whether there is early and direct involvement of the brain. The determination of whether an individual has severe or attenuated MPS I is critical as different treatment options are available. Individuals with severe MPS I usually have symptoms apparent by 6 months of age whereas individuals with attenuated MPS I may not become apparent until after the age of 3 years with many attenuated MPS I individuals not diagnosed until late childhood or even the teenage years. Individuals with severe MPS I have onset of symptoms in early infancy with evidence of early progressive intellectual decline and when untreated, die within the first decade. In contrast, individuals with attenuated MPS I have later onset of disease symptoms, more slowly progressive disease with sparing of intelligence and can have a near normal life expectancy. MPS I is caused by variations (AKA mutations or pathogenic sequence variants) in theIDUAgene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Therefore, both parents of every affected MPS I individual are carriers of MPS I. Being a carrier for MPS I does not lead to symptoms.

Introduction

MPS I is member of a group of hereditary metabolic diseases known as the mucopolysaccharidoses which, in turn, are part of a larger group of diseases known as lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs). Lysosomes function as the primary digestive and recycling units within cells. Enzymes within lysosomes break down or digest particular cellular components, such carbohydrates, proteins and fats to their basic units which can then be recycled. Healthy cells and organs are constantly breaking down, recycling and building new cellular components. In individuals with MPS disorders, including MPS I, deficiency or improper functioning of lysosomal enzymes leads to an abnormal accumulation of a particular complex carbohydrate known as glycosaminoglycans. Glycosaminoglycans were once known as mucopolysaccharides and are how these disorders got their names. When cells cannot breakdown these glycosaminoglycans they then accumulate within various tissues, such as the bones, joints, brain, spinal cord, heart, spleen, or liver and lead to the symptoms that MPS I individuals have.
MPS I is best thought of as a spectrum of disease that ranges from severe forms (Hurler syndrome) that are present very early in life to less severe forms that may not become apparent until much later in childhood.  Individuals with MPS I were previously classified as having either a severe, mild, or intermediate form of the disorder. The severe form was known as Hurler syndrome, the mild form was known as Scheie syndrome, and the intermediate form was known as Hurler-Scheie syndrome. Although the term Hurler syndrome is still used, the term attenuated MPS I is now used in place of Hurler-Scheie and Scheie.

symptoms:
The specific signs and symptoms seen in MPS I are highly variable and depends on numerous factors including what form of MPS I a child has, when treatment was first started, and how an individual child responds to various treatment options. It is important to note that MPS I is a progressive disorder and therefore the symptoms that a child has are also related to the age of the child at the time of diagnosis. The age of onset, disease severity, degree of intellectual disability, and rate of progression vary significantly among affected individuals.
Severe Mucopolysaccharidosis Type ICommon signs and symptoms of the severe form of mucopolysaccharidosis type I are delays in the developmental of motor skills and intelligence, and skeletal deformities. Symptoms may not be present at birth and may not become apparent until several months to 1 year of age.
Sometimes, affected infants have an inguinal or umbilical hernia. Inguinal hernia is when some abdominal tissue or part of the small intestine pushes through a bulge or tear in the abdominal muscles near the groin. An umbilical hernia is when some abdominal tissue or part of the small intestine pushes through a bulge or tear in the bellybutton. Affected infants often experience repeated upper respiratory tract infections in the first year of life. Because both hernias and ear infections occur commonly in children, these findings alone do not often lead to diagnosis.
Within the first year to 18 months of age, affected children usually
Develop distinctive facial features often described as being coarse. This can include thickening of the tongue, lips, outside of the nostrils (alae nasi), and the earlobes. Thickening of the top of the skull (skullcap or calvarium) can lead to infants having an unusually big head (macrocephaly). The head may eventually appear abnormally long and narrow (scaphocephaly). Excessive hair growth (hypertrichosis) of the face and body can also occur, although scalp hair may be coarse and straight, resembling thatch or straw.Show signs of abnormal development usually related to slow acquisition of speech and fine motor skillsExperience frequent infections of the middle ear (otitis media), which can contribute to hearing loss.Show signs of skeletal disease including a bulging out of the lower back (gibbous deformity) and/or joints that appear stiff.Clouding (opacity) of the cornea that can get worse with age eventually cause vision impairment. Increased pressure within the eye called glaucoma can be present and contribute to vision loss. The retina may degenerate. The retina is a membrane that lines the back of the eyes and contains specialized cells called cones and rods. These cells convert light into nerve impulses to be sent along the optic nerve to the brain to be converted into images. The optic nerve, which is the main nerve of the eye, may also break down (optic atrophy). Eye abnormalities can lead to vision loss, night blindness, and eventually loss of sight.Enlargement of the liver and spleen. This is detected by the doctor when the child is examined but the enlargement of the liver and spleen does not lead to symptoms themselves.
The signs listed above represent the early signs of severe disease but because this disorder is progressive other potential symptoms occur as the disease progresses and children age and include:
Progressive delays in development with decline in metal function particularly when therapy is not initiated early.A buildup of cerebrospinal fluid in the brain (hydrocephalus).There may be delayed or deficient growth in infants and children. Short stature is when children are notably shorter than would otherwise be expected based on their age and gender.Progressive bone and joint disease (termed dysostosis multiplex) is seen in all MPS I children and leads toAll joints becoming stiffThe fingers becoming stiff leading to a “claw hand deformity”Stiffness of the hipsKnocked knees also known as “valgus deformity”Curvature of the spine also known as scoliosisCarpal tunnel syndrome (pinching of the nerves at the wrist)Compression of the spineThe airway or breathing system is also commonly involved and can lead toEnlargement of tonsils and tongueNarrow windpipeDifficulty sleeping at night due to blockage of airflow during sleep, sleep apneaThe heart is also involved in MPS I and can lead to:Valve disease with thickening and leaking of valves most commonly the mitral and aortic valves. Mitral valve and aortic regurgitation are common findings. The mitral valve is located between the left upper and left lower chambers of the heart; it allows blood to flow from one chamber of the heart (the left atrium) to another chamber (the left ventricle). Abnormal thickening of the mitral valve can occur, which can allow blood to flow backward (regurgitation), which can lead to reduced blood flow throughout the body. Aortic regurgitation is when the aortic valve becomes thickened and allows blood to flow backward from the aorta (which is the main artery of the body) into the left ventricle. Aortic regurgitation can cause shortness of breath, chest pain, and potentially rapid heart failure. Additional heart complications can include irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias), overgrowth (hypertrophy) of the left upper chamber of the heart (left ventricle), and coronary artery disease.The heart can also be directly involved also called cardiomyopathy.The eyes or involved and lead toCorneal cloudingIncreased pressure in the eyes (glaucoma)Retinal disease: involvement of the back of the eyesHearing loss is also common in MPS I
Attenuated Mucopolysaccharidosis Type IChildren described as having the attenuated form of MPS I experience similar signs and symptoms seen in severely affected patients but tend to show slower disease progression and later age of onset of symptoms. A key difference between severe and attenuated patients is that attenuated patients do not show early developmental delay and do not experience progressive decline in mental capabilities. As a group, attenuated patients show significant variability in the symptoms they have and the rate of progression. Some children are mildly affected and have a near normal lifespan, while others develop symptoms during childhood, usually around 6 or 7 years old and can develop life-threatening complications by their teen-aged years or during their 20s. These symptoms of the attenuated form are as described as above for the severe form. The symptoms can be as significant as the severe form, or can be milder. Individuals with attenuated MPS I can have their quality of life significantly affected.
Intelligence is usually not affected in children with attenuated MPS I, but some children and young adults may experience learning disabilities. Affected children will have varying degrees of growth deficiency. They can develop an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly), clouding of the cornea, and heart valve abnormalities during their teen-aged years. Corneal clouding can lead to significant problems with vision. Other eye abnormalities including glaucoma, optic atrophy, and degeneration of the retina can also occur. Progressive heart valve problems can begin as early 10 or 11 years of age. Coronary heart disease can also occur.
Dysostosis multiplex, skeletal malformations, carpal tunnel syndrome, and progressive joint disease can also occur in the attenuated forms. These signs and symptoms are the same as described above for the severe form. Affected individuals may also have a high arch to the feet (pes cavus) and knees that are angled in so that they rub together when the legs are straight (knock knees or genu valgum). Some children may walk on the balls of their feet so that the heels do not touch the ground (toe-walking).
Moderate to severe hearing loss can also occur in the attenuated forms. Some children may develop sleep apnea. Hernias can also be present. Progressive compression of the spinal cord can also be possible and can cause problems including exercise intolerance and reduced activity.

