Mucormycosis

synonyms:
zygomycosis

overview:
Summary
Mucormycosis is a general term for a group of uncommon infections cause by a fungus (fungal infection). Mucormycosis is caused by a group of related molds from the order Mucorales. An “order” is a scientific term for classifying similar organisms. These infections are usually acquired when spores from the molds are breathed in (inhaled) or, less commonly, enter the body through a cut in the skin. Mucormycosis is an aggressive, life-threatening infection that occurs in people whose immune system doesn’t function well (immune-compromised) including people with uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, people who have low levels of neutrophils, a type of white blood cell that helps the body fight off infection and heal itself (neutropenia), or people whose immune system is being suppressed by medications (immunosuppression) as part of their treatment for blood cancer (hematological malignancy), hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, or solid-organ transplant. The infection is not contagious; it cannot be spread from one person to another. Prompt diagnosis and early treatment are critical. Treatment usually consists of antifungal medications and surgery.
Introduction
Mucormycosis is an invasive fungal infection. These infections were once called zygomycosis, but the organisms that cause the infection, specific types of molds, have been scientifically reclassified and the term mucormycosis is now preferred. Generally, these infections are broken down into five presentations: rhinocerebellar, pulmonary, cutaneous, gastrointestinal and disseminated.

symptoms:
The most common presentation is a sinus infection (sinusitis) that is accompanied by nasal congestion, nasal discharge and sinus pain. A fever and headache can also occur. If the infection spreads outside the sinuses, symptoms can include tissue loss (necrosis) of the roof of the mouth (palate), disintegration of thin wall of cartilage and bone (septum) that divides the nostrils (septum), swelling of the area around the nose (perinasal area) and redness (erythema) of the skin overlying the sinus and the eye socket (orbit). Sometimes, there is bluish discoloration of the skin near the sinuses or the eye socket due to a lack of oxygen (cyanosis). Sometimes, blurry vision or double vision can develop. If unrecognized and untreated, significant tissue death (necrosis) can occur and the infection can significantly damage facial structures.
Sometimes, mucormycosis can spread to the brain. This can cause lethargy, seizures, slurred speech, partial paralysis, abnormalities of the nerves of the face and eyes (cranial neuropathies), a brain abscess, altered consciousness and coma. When the sinuses and brain is involved, this infection can be referred to as rhinocerebral mucormycosis.
When the infection spreads to the eye, there can be swelling due to fluid buildup around the eyes (periorbital edema), bulging or displacement of the eye (proptosis), vision loss and potentially blindness. Some affected individuals experience paralysis or weakness of the muscles that move the eyes (ophthalmoplegia), making it difficult or painful to move the eyes.
Mucormycosis can affect the lungs (pulmonary mucormycosis), most often when the spores are breathed in and reach the respiratory system. Pulmonary mucormycosis is often a rapidly progressive disease characterized by fever and a cough that does not produce any mucous (nonproductive cough). Less often, spitting or coughing up of blood (hemoptysis), chest pain and difficulty breathing (dyspnea) will occur.
When mucormycosis affects the skin (cutaneous mucormycosis), affected individuals can develop a single, painful, hardened area of the skin and inflammation of the underlying tissue. Nearby skin may become reddened, warm, swollen and painful. Sometimes, open sores (ulcers) and blisters will form, and tissue loss (necrosis) can occur with the affected tissue turning black. Affected individuals may have a fever. Cutaneous mucormycosis can develop slowly or be severe and sudden in onset (fulminant).
Sometimes, the gastrointestinal system can be affected. This most likely occurs when spores are breathed into the mouth and swallowed or contaminated food is eaten. Symptoms can include abdominal pain and vomiting of blood (hematemesis). Lesions can develop that cause a hole to form in the stomach or intestines (perforation). Inflammation of the peritoneum (peritonitis), the membrane that lines the wall of the abdomen and covers the organs inside the abdomen, can also develop. Sometimes, severe pain in the bowels can occur because of a lack of blood flow (bowel infarction) and affected individuals can go into shock because of significant blood loss (hemorrhagic shock).
Disseminated mucormycosis is a rare form often seen in individuals who are severely immune compromised. In this form, the infection spreads to other areas of the body and becomes widespread (disseminated). Other areas that can be affected include the brain, heart, spleen, skin and other organs.
In rare instances, mucormycosis can affect or spread to affect the kidneys, the inner lining of the chambers of the heart and the heart valves (endocarditis), and the bone (osteomyelitis). Signs and symptoms of disseminated mucormycosis vary greatly depending upon the organ system involved.

