Mucopolysaccharidosis IV

synonyms:
MPS IVmucopolysaccharidosis IVMorquio syndrome

overview:
Summary
Mucopolysaccharidosis IV (MPS IV) is a mucopolysaccharide storage disease that exists in two forms (MPS IVA and MPS IVB). These are autosomal recessive genetic conditions that comprise a continuum consisting of a severe form with rapid progression and another slowly progressing form. The severe form becomes apparent between the ages of one and three and typically presents with knock-knees and breastbone prominence. The slowly progressing form, which may not become apparent until adolescence, presents with hip pain and stiffness.
Although they are subtypes of the same disease, it is important to distinguish MPS IVA from MPS IVB for the purposes of effective treatment and disease management. MPS IVA can only be distinguished from MPS IVB by molecular genetic or biochemical testing because of the similarities in the symptoms they present. MPS IV occurs because of a deficiency of the enzyme N-acetyl-galactosamine-6-sulfatase (GALNS) and MPS IVB occurs due to a deficiency of beta-galactosidase.
A deficiency of either enzyme leads to the accumulation of mucopolysaccharides in the body, abnormal skeletal development, and additional symptoms. In most cases, individuals with MPS IV have normal intelligence. The clinical features of MPS IVB are usually fewer and milder than those associated with MPS IVA. Enzyme replacement therapy is available to treat MPS IVA.
Introduction
The mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) are a group of inherited lysosomal storage disorders. Lysosomes function as the primary digestive units within cells. Enzymes within lysosomes break down or digest particular nutrients, such as certain carbohydrates and fats. In individuals with MPS disorders, deficiency or malfunction of specific lysosomal enzymes leads to an abnormal accumulation of certain complex carbohydrates (mucopolysaccharides or glycosaminoglycans) in the arteries, skeleton, eyes, joints, ears, skin, and/or teeth. These accumulations may also be found in the respiratory system, liver, spleen, central nervous system, blood, and bone marrow. This accumulation eventually causes progressive damage to cells, tissues, and various organ systems of the body. There are several different types and subtypes of mucopolysaccharidosis.

symptoms:
Symptoms of MPS IV may include growth delays; a prominent lower face; abnormal sideways and front-to-back or side-to-side curvature of the spine (kyphoscoliosis) or concern for a spine abnormality; an abnormally short neck; knees that are abnormally close together (knock knees or genu valgum); flat feet; abnormal development of the growing ends of the long bones (epiphyses); hip dislocation and arthritis and/or a prominent breast bone (pectus carinatum). Hearing loss, weakness of the legs, and/or additional abnormalities may also occur.
Affected children have a characteristic facial appearance that may include an enlarged head, broad mouth, prominent cheekbones, an unusually small nose, widely spaced and thinly enameled teeth, and widely separated eyes with subtle corneal clouding. The liver and spleen may be mildly enlarged. Children with MPS IV show marked growth abnormalities with short trunks and normal limbs from early in life. The elbows, wrists, hips, knees and other large joints are abnormally flexible, causing overall instability. Affected individuals exhibit a waddling gait with frequent falls. Early development and intelligence are typically normal, unlike other MPS storage disorders. High frequency hearing impairment is common.
Skeletal X-rays typically show marked flattening of the vertebra. The long bones of the arms and legs are characteristically shorter and thicker than normal. The skull is large for the rest of the body. The connection between the first and second vertebrae in the neck is poorly developed and this abnormality can be life threatening. A trivial injury may cause the two vertebrae to slip on each other and compress the spinal cord. Surgery to stabilize the upper cervical spine, usually by spinal fusion, can be lifesaving but life expectancy is decreased somewhat despite surgery. The deformity of the chest causes a strain on the heart and lungs, which may eventually cause respiratory failure.

