Mucopolysaccharidosis Type VII

synonyms:
beta-glucuronidase deficiencyGUSB deficiencyMPS disorder, type VIIMPS VIIMPS 7mucopolysaccharidosis 7Sly syndrome

overview:
Summary
Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII (MPS VII) is a rare, progressive inborn error of metabolism that affects many parts of the body. The clinical features of MPS VII vary from patient to patient, but all have short stature due to growth retardation and skeletal abnormalities, changes in bones visible on X-rays (dysostosis multiplex), and some degree of intellectual disability. Survival into adulthood is common for patients with milder cases and osteoarthritis is a common complication. MPS VII is inherited as an autosomal recessive genetic condition.
Introduction
MPS VII is in a group of hereditary metabolic diseases known as the mucopolysaccharidoses which in turn, are part of a group known as lysosomal storage disorders. Lysosomes function as the primary digestive units within cells. Enzymes within lysosomes break down or digest particular nutrients, such as certain carbohydrates and fats. In individuals with MPS disorders, including MPS VII, deficiency or improper functioning of lysosomal enzymes leads to an abnormal accumulation of certain complex carbohydrates in cells (mucopolysaccharides, also known as glycosaminoglycans) within various tissues, such as the skeleton, joints, brain, spinal cord, heart, spleen, or liver.

symptoms:
The most severe cases of MPS VII are characterized by hydrops fetalis, or when excess fluid accumulates in the body before birth. This can result in a stillborn or death shortly after birth. Neonatal jaundice or the yellowing of the skin may occur.
Children with more mild cases of MPS VII begin to show symptoms in early childhood. Children with MPS VII may have an unusually short trunk and growth disability, resulting in short stature (short trunk dwarfism). The head may be excessively large (macrocephalic) and the neck may be short. A variety of multiple bone deformities (dysostosis multiplex), which are frequently observed in people with mucopolysaccharidoses, are also common in children with MPS VII. These bone deformities may include a prominent breast bone (pectus carinatum), flared ribs, frequent hip dislocations, “frozen” joints (contractures), club foot, and/or an inward curve of the knees and outward bowing of the ankles (genu valgum).Rarely, spinal malformations may be present including mild curvature of the spine from side to side (scoliosis) and/or front to back (kyphosis). Children with this disorder may develop an unusual “coarse” facial appearance. Between the ages of 7 months and 8 years, cloudiness (opacity) may occur in the corneas of the eyes.
Affected individuals may have developmental delays in language and speech and progressive intellectual disability, although intelligence is normal in some people with this condition.
Other symptoms of MPS VII may include a swollen abdomen due to abnormal enlargement of the liver and/or spleen (hepatosplenomegaly) and protrusion of the intestines through an abnormal opening in the muscular wall of the abdomen (inguinal hernia). In some children, the intestines may also protrude through the abdominal wall in the area of the navel (umbilical hernia). Some affected children may experience profound hearing loss, recurrent upper respiratory and middle ear infections, thickening of the soft tissues of the throat and/or vocal cords, an abnormally enlarged tongue (macroglossia), and/or heart problems (i.e., heart murmur or aortic regurgitation). Excessive hairiness (hirsutism) may be present.
Children may develop carpal tunnel syndrome characterized by numbness, tingling and weakness in the hands and fingers.
Survival to age 19-20 years has been reported in mild cases. Life expectancy is reduced as a result of frequent upper respiratory tract infections, neurodegenerative complications and abnormalities of the gastrointestinal tract.
A mild form of MPS VII, beginning during the 2nd decade of life, has been described in the medical literature. In these patients, the symptoms of the disorder appear to be less severe than classical MPS VII and may include minor bony changes and very mild facial coarseness. Growth rate and mental abilities are usually normal. Abnormal enlargement of the liver and spleen has not been noticed in this form of MPS VII.

