Mucopolysaccharidosis Type II

synonyms:
MPS IIHunter syndromeI2S deficiencyiduronate 2-sulfatase deficiency

overview:
Summary
Mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS II) is a rare lysosomal inborn error of metabolism that affects every organ of the body. Although the age of onset, disease severity and the rate of progression of the disease vary significantly, initial symptoms and findings associated with MPS II usually become apparent in children from two to four years of age. Manifestations of MPS II may include not inflammatory joint stiffness, with associated restriction of movements; and coarsening of facial features, including thickening of the lips, tongue (macroglossia), and nostrils. Affected children may also have an abnormally large head (macrocephaly), a short neck and broad chest, delayed tooth eruption, progressive hearing loss, enlargement of the liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly), cardiac valve disease and progressive growth delays resulting in short stature. Two relatively distinct clinical forms of MPS II have been recognized. In the non-neuronopathic form (formerly defined as slowly progressive milder form) of the disease, intelligence may be normal or only slightly impaired. In the neuronopathic form of the disease (formerly called early progressive more severe form), intellectual disabilities may be apparent in the early life of the patient.
MPS II is an X-linked genetic condition that mostly affects males; although a few females have been described as well, and is caused by changes (mutations) of theIDSgene that regulates the production of the iduronate 2-sulfatase enzyme. This enzyme is needed to break-down complex sugars, known as glycosaminoglycans, produced in the body.
Introduction
MPS II is one of a group of seven hereditary metabolic diseases known as the mucopolysaccharidoses, which in turn, are part of a group known as lysosomal storage disorders. Lysosomes function as the primary digestive units within cells. Enzymes within lysosomes break down or digest particular nutrients, such as certain carbohydrates and fats. In individuals with MPS disorders, including MPS II, deficiency or improper functioning of lysosomal enzymes leads to an abnormal accumulation of certain complex carbohydrates in cells (mucopolysaccharides, also known as glycosaminoglycans) within various tissues, such as the skeleton, joints, brain, spinal cord, heart, spleen, or liver.

symptoms:
In the neuronopathic form of this disorder, physical and mental development reaches a peak at 2-4 years of age with subsequent deterioration. Recurrent upper respiratory infections, a chronic runny nose, hearing impairment, liver and spleen enlargement, inguinal and abdominal hernias, joint stiffness and multiplex dysplasia, compression of tendons in the wrist (carpal tunnel syndrome), and joint stiffness which can result in reduction of hand function, growth failure and valvular disease commonly occur with this form of MPS II. Coarsening of the facial features with thickening of the nostrils, lips and tongue usually occur between 2 and 4 years of age. Hydrocephalus (fluid buildup in the cavities deep within the brain) is commonly found in this form of MPS II after 4 years of age. Thick skin, short neck, widely spaced teeth, and hearing loss of varying degree are also commonly present. Nodular skin lesions on the arm or the posterior chest wall, extra- high arched feet (pes cavus) and diarrhea may also occur.
Corneal clouding and cervical spine compression (very common in other MPSs) are less frequent in MPSII thank in other MPSs.
In the non-neuronopathic form of MPS II, mental function is usually normal, while the systemic complications are similar, although sometimes a reduced severity.

