Mucous Membrane Pemphigoid

synonyms:
cicatricial pemphigoidCPMMPmucous membrane pemphigoid

overview:
Mucous membrane pemphigoid (MMP) is a group of rare chronic autoimmune disorders characterized by blistering lesions that primarily affect the various mucous membranes of the body. The mucous membranes of the mouth and eyes are most often affected. The mucous membranes of the nose, throat, genitalia, and anus may also be affected. The symptoms of MMP vary among affected individuals depending upon the specific site(s) involved and the progression of the disease. Blistering lesions eventually heal, sometimes with scarring. Progressive scarring may potentially lead to serious complications affecting the eyes and throat. In some cases, blistering lesions also form on the skin, especially in the head and neck area. The exact cause of MMP is unknown.
MMP has been known by many different names within the medical literature including benign mucous membrane pemphigoid, cicatricial (scarring) pemphigoid, and ocular cicatricial pemphigoid. In March of 2002, a consensus group of researchers determined that mucous membrane pemphigoid was the best designation for this group of disorders. The term “benign” mucous membrane pemphigoid was deemed inappropriate because of the potential for serious complications in some cases. The term “cicatricial” pemphigoid excluded affected individuals who do not develop scarring. Site-specific terms such as “ocular” cicatricial pemphigoid excluded individuals with multiple site involvement.

symptoms:
MMP is characterized by the development of recurring blistering skin lesions affecting the mucous membranes of the body. These lesions may result in scarring of the affected area. Specific symptoms and severity vary from person to person depending upon the specific site(s) involved. It is important to note that affected individuals, in most cases, will not have all of the symptoms listed below.
The mucous membranes lining the mouth and eyes are most commonly affected. In some cases, the first sign of MMP is a red and blistered mouth. The gums (gingivae), roof of the mouth (palate), and the mucous membrane lining the inner cheek (buccal mucosa) may be affected. Involvement of the gums usually results in very red, tender gums that bleed easily and tend to slough off in shreds or sheets. Blistering lesions may spread to affect the tube that carries food from the mouth to the stomach (esophagus) as well as the voice box (larynx) potentially resulting in difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) and hoarseness. After these lesions heal, progressive scarring may occur, resulting in serious complications including narrowing (stenosis) of the esophagus and/or the larynx. In addition, the opening between the vocal cords (supraglottic region) may also narrow (supraglottic stenosis). In rare severe cases, such symptoms can ultimately result in life-threatening complications such as asphyxiation (breathing is cut off).
In many cases of MMP, the mucous membranes lining the eyes (conjunctiva) may be involved. Inflammation of conjunctiva (conjunctivitis) or erosions forming on the conjunctiva may be the initial signs of ocular involvement in MMP. Involvement of the eyes may not be obvious at first, however, and only a special examination by an eye doctor (ophthalmologist) can detect the earliest scarring that develops just beneath the conjunctiva. In most cases, one eye is involved first and the second eye becomes involved later, usually with two years. Ocular symptoms may include pain or grittiness of the eye, increased pressure within the eye (glaucoma), abnormal inward turning of the eyelid (entropion), and abnormal inward turning of the eyelashes (trichiasis) potentially causing irritation of the eyeball. Adhesions may form between the eyelids (symblepharon) or between the eyelid and the eye itself. In some cases, MMP may progress to cause clouding (opacity) of the corneas, loss of vision and, potentially, blindness.
In some cases, affected individuals may develop blistering lesions affecting only the eyes or the mouth, with no involvement of other mucosal sites. Scarring occurs with less frequency in cases of MMP that only involve the mucous membranes of the mouth (oral mucosa). Additional sites where lesions may form include mucous membranes of the nose, genitalia, and anus. Pain, bleeding and scarring may occur at these sites. Urinary and sexual dysfunction may result secondary to genital involvement.
In approximately 20-30 percent of cases, the skin may become involved. In these patients, the skin of the head and neck is usually affected. Skin lesions may be either fluid-filled blisters (bullous) or reddish (erythematous) plaques, which may bleed or itch. Eventually they scar upon healing. Scarring may result in areas of discoloration of the skin (known as hyperpigmentation when it is darkened patches and hypopigmentation when it is light patches). Involvement of the scalp may lead to patchy areas of hair loss (alopecia).
MMP usually has a long duration with frequent remissions and recurrence.

