Mucopolysaccharidosis Type III

synonyms:
MPS IIImucopolysaccharide storage disease type IIISanfilippo syndromeSanfilippo disease

overview:
Summary
Mucopolysaccharidosis type III (MPS III) is a rare genetic condition that causes fatal brain damage. It is also known as Sanfilippo syndrome and is a type of childhood dementia.
MPS III is caused by the lack of an enzyme that normally breaks down and recycles a large, complex sugar molecule called heparan sulfate. This heparan sulphate accumulates and causes damage to the cells of the body, particularly in the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord).
There are four subtypes of MPS III: types A, B, C and D. Each type is caused by a change (variant or mutation) in a different gene (see below). All types of MPS III are associated with mental deterioration, but the severity and rate of progression depends on the type of MPS III. There is also variability in severity within the subtypes and even between affected siblings.
Introduction
Sanfilippo syndrome belongs to a group of disorders known as the mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS), which are part of a larger group of disorders known as lysosomal storage disorders.

symptoms:
Children with MPS III usually appear healthy at birth, but developmental delay is usually evident by age 2-5 years. A mild speech delay is often one of the first presenting features. Mental and motor development peak by 3-6 years of age, after which intellectual decline usually occurs Severe behavioral disturbances, such as hyperactivity and irritability, are a very common feature of Sanfilippo syndrome, and one of the more difficult aspects of the disorder to manage. The nature of the behavioral symptoms can often lead to an initial diagnosis (misdiagnosis) of autism and/or attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
Other symptoms can include coarse hair, excess hair growth (hirsutism), slightly coarse facial features, severe sleeping problems, mildly enlarged liver and/or spleen, speech delay, respiratory and ear infections, diarrhea, hernias, seizures and a wobbly and erratic walk. The heart may also be affected and children with MPS III also often have hearing loss and vision impairment.
Children with Sanfilippo syndrome usually start to lose their intellectual functions, especially speech, before their motor function declines. Death can occur from before the age of 10 or not until the third or fourth decades of life, with the average being around 15 to 20 years of age. Children with MPS IIIC have a longer life expectancy into the mid-twenties on average. There are other forms of MPS III which result in slower progression and a longer life expectancy.

