Mueller-Weisse Disease

synonyms:
Brailsford diseaseadult tarsal scaphoiditisspontaneous adult navicular osteonecrosislisthesis navicularisMueller-Weiss syndrome

overview:
Summary

Mueller-Weiss disease (MWD) is a rare foot condition characterized by a misshaped navicular bone and subsequent early-onset degenerative arthritis of the neighboring joints. It typically presents as longstanding subtle midfoot pain without a history of injury and progresses to severe, debilitating pain that worsens with weight-bearing activity. Most patients are females in their 40s to 60s but there are reported cases in males and patients as young as 18. MWD may be present in only one foot or both, and it is not unusual for one side to be more painful than the other. The exact cause of MWD is unknown, but it has traditionally been thought to be due to spontaneous bone cell death (osteonecrosis) of the navicular bone. The navicular bone is commonly described as “comma shaped” on X-ray and may be fragmented in later stages of disease. No gold standard treatment currently exists for MWD, but conservative and surgical options have been described in case reports and case series. Surgical treatment options should be considered if conservative therapy is unsuccessful after six months, and the decision about whether to operate should be based on patient discomfort rather than stage of deformity.

Introduction

Mueller-Weiss disease was originally described by Schmidt in 1925. W. Mueller, in 1927, was the first to suggest that this condition was caused by compression on the tarsus or an abnormality present at birth (congenital). In 1929, the radiologist, K. Weiss was the first to propose that the disease was due to decreased blood flow (ischemic process) based on radiographic findings. Thus, the condition was named for Mueller and Weiss for being the first to describe the cause of the disease. Mueller-Weiss disease is often misdiagnosed and therefore, not treated properly. Early recognition and treatment of this disease may lead to improved outcomes by prevention of extensive degenerative changes.

symptoms:
Patients usually present with chronic, atraumatic mid and hindfoot pain without prior trauma that worsens with weight-bearing activity. The pain may be constant or intermittent, but typically worsens over time. Patients also complain of difficulty walking, foot swelling, joint stiffness and limitation of movement, and positional foot deformities including a paradoxical varus hindfoot deformity. In later stages of disease, it is common for MWD patients to have a positive heel raise test on physical exam, indicating posterior tibial tendon dysfunction. Patients may also present with arthritis and anterior knee pain.

