Muenke Syndrome

synonyms:
FGFR3-related craniosynostosis

overview:
Summary
Muenke syndrome is a genetic condition characterized by an early closure of certain bones of the skull (craniosynostosis). The main signs and symptoms of Muenke syndrome include craniosynostosis and other bone defects on x-rays, different head shapes and distinct facial features. Other characteristics include hearing loss, developmental delay, intellectual disability, behavioral issues, epilepsy, eyes drifting inward or outward (strabismus), repetitive, uncontrolled eye movements (nystagmus), vision loss and interrupted breathing during sleep (obstructive sleep apnea). Craniosynostosis is typically diagnosed in newborns.
Muenke syndrome is caused by changes (pathogenic variants) in theFGFR3gene.
The best outcomes are observed if the affected children receive early surgical procedures as well as early and continued medical management of the other signs and symptoms of the disorder.

Introduction
Dr. Maximilian Muenke, a medical geneticist, first identified this disorder in 1997 making this diagnosis distinct from other previously defined craniosynostosis syndromes. Muenke syndrome may also be known asFGFR3-related craniosynostosis. Notably, Muenke syndrome is estimated to account for 25%-30% of all genetic causes of craniosynostosis.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of Muenke syndrome vary among affected people, and a few people with Muenke syndrome do not have any of the characteristic features of the disorder. For example, some patients may not have craniosynostosis. The symptoms and signs may include:
•	Craniosynostosis, especially coronal craniosynostosis (present in about 85% of patients) which is the early horizontal fusion of the skull between the ears•	Hearing loss (70% of patients)•	Recurrent ear infections, which if not treated effectively can lead to hearing loss•	Large head (macrocephaly)•	Developmental delay (60% of patients), most commonly speech delay•	Intellectual disability (40% of patients)•	Behavioral issues which may include hyperactivity, attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or autism•	Crossed eyes (strabismus)•	Differences in the structure or shape of the hands and toes (50% of patients), but these typically do not cause medical problems or difficulty in daily life•	Seizures, which are rare, but can occur at any time•	Distinctive face, such as down-slanting eyes, eyes that are spaced widely (hypertelorism), forehead that is more rounded (frontal bossing), an opening in the lip or roof of the mouth (cleft lip or palate), flattening of the middle part of face (midface hypoplasia) and a small jaw (retrognathia)

