Multifocal Motor Neuropathy

synonyms:
MMNMMNCBmultifocal motor neuropathy with conduction block

overview:
Multifocal motor neuropathy is a rare disorder characterized by slowly progressive muscle weakness, primarily of the arms and legs. The disorder is considered to be immune-mediated, which means there is inflammation resulting from abnormal functioning of the immune system and the presence of specific autoantibodies that target a specific protein in the body. Other symptoms including muscles cramps and wasting (atrophy) of muscles can also occur. The term multifocal means arising from two or more spots. The term motor refers to the motor nerves, which are those that carry nerve impulses from the brain to the muscles. The exact, underlying cause of this disorder is not fully understood. The disorder is acquired at some point during a person’s life; a person is not born with the disorder. Multifocal motor neuropathy usually responds to treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin.

symptoms:
Multifocal motor neuropathy is a progressive disorder, this means that the signs and symptoms tend to worsen slowly over time. The main symptom is progressive muscle weakness of the arms and legs. Unlike other neurological disorders affecting the arms and legs, there usually is not any sensory deficits. This means that feelings of tingling or numbness or pain are not associated with the disorder. Muscle weakness often begins in the hands, causing hand weakness and affected individuals may drop objects frequently or have difficulty performing tasks that require fine motor skills such as turning a key in a lock. Fine motor skills are those that require small movements involving the hands and wrists. Some individuals have trouble extending or bending their wrist upward (wrist drop). Reduced grip strength of the hands and reduced dexterity of the hands is seen. Sometimes, muscle weakness starts in the legs. There may be reduced mobility of the toes and foot drop may be early signs. Foot drop occurs when weakness of the muscles involving in lifting the food cause the foot to drop or drag when attempting to walk.
As muscle weakness progresses, severe fatigue in the affected muscles may be seen and the disorder will cause functional disability. Affected individuals may have limited endurance. The muscles on one side of the body that are affected may be different from the muscle affected on the other side of the body (asymmetrical muscle weakness).
Additional symptoms associated with multifocal motor neuropathy include cramping, involuntary muscle contractions or “twitches” (fasciculations), decreased muscle tone, and, sometimes absent deep tendon reflexes. Later in the progression of the disease, wasting (atrophy) of the affected muscles may occur.
Other muscles such as those affecting breathing are unaffected and the disorder usually does not affect life expectancy.

