Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 1

synonyms:
MEN-1MEN-1 syndromemultiple endocrine adenomatosisWermer's syndrome

overview:
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 1 is a rare genetic disorder characterized by multiple tumors arising from cells of specific neuroendocrine tissues. The endocrine system is the network of glands that secrete hormones into the bloodstream to reach their target organs along the entire body. These hormones regulate the chemical processes (metabolism) that influence the function of various organs and activities within the body. Hormones are involved in numerous vital and metabolic processes, including regulating heart rate, body temperature and blood pressure, as well as cell differentiation and growth.
In individuals with MEN type 1, tumors develop in multiple endocrine glands, principally the parathyroids, gastro-entero-pancreatic tract and anterior pituitary gland. These affected glands secrete excessive amounts of hormones into the bloodstream, which can result in a variety of symptoms and related syndromes. Some tumors associated with MEN type 1 are cancerous (malignant) (i.e., gastrinomas and carcinoids) and can spread to other organs (metastasize). Other, less frequent, features of the MEN1 syndrome are neuroendocrine tumors of thymus and bronchi, adrenocortical tumors, lipomas, visceral leiomyomas, truncal and facial collagenomas, facial angiofibroma, breast carcinoma, meningioma and ependymomas. MEN type 1 can run in families, in which the causative gene variant is inherited from an affected parent, or it can occur, in extremely rare cases, as the result of a newly developed gene variant in the affected person.

symptoms:
MEN type 1-associated symptoms depend on which glands are affected by the overgrowth of tissue (hyperplasia) or tumor formation. Although most tumors are benign (noncancerous), tissue overgrowth or tumor formation causes the affected glands to become hyperactive and produce excess hormones. Elevated hormone levels are the main cause of MEN type 1-associated signs and symptoms. Certain tumors, such as gastrinomas and carcinoid tumors can potentially become malignant, and they still represent the two main causes of MEN type 1-associated death. The clinical expression of MEN type 1 is highly variable even within members of the same family and identical twins.
More than 20 different endocrine and non-endocrine tumors have been identified in individuals with MEN type 1. Affected individuals will not necessarily develop tumors at the same age or in the same locations and, therefore, they can manifest variable clinical signs and symptoms during their lifetime. Some individuals may only develop mild symptoms; others may develop serious, life-threatening complications. Some individuals may develop symptoms as young adults or adolescents; others may not develop symptoms until middle-age or older. It is important to note that individual cases are highly variable and that affected individuals will not develop all the symptoms discussed below.
PARATHYROID GLANDSThe most common affected endocrine glands in MEN type 1 are parathyroids, both as multiglandular hyperplasia and/or adenomas. Parathyroid glands are generally represented by four very small glands (approximately the size of a pea) located in the neck that secrete parathyroid hormone (PTH), which controls the serum calcium level. Hyperparathyroidism is the medical term indicating a constantly high level of circulating PTH. More than 90 percent of individuals with MEN type 1 develop, by age 50, primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) due to PTH hyperproduction by the affected parathyroid gland(s). The mean age of onset is the third decade of life. In some people, hyperparathyroidism may be detected during adolescence and infancy (by the age of 5). PHPT is the first sign of MEN type 1 in about 90% of patients.
PHPT can be very mild and may not cause any obvious symptoms (asymptomatic). Untreated hyperparathyroidism generally results in elevated serum level of calcium (hypercalcemia), which can cause kidney stones or damage the kidneys. Hyperparathyroidism can cause additional symptoms in some people, including fatigue, weakness, constipation, nausea, ulcers, indigestion, high blood pressure (hypertension) and muscle or bone pain. Central nervous system abnormalities can eventually develop including mental status changes, lethargy, depression and confusion, as a consequence of severe hypercalcemia. Some individuals may develop abnormal thinning of bones (osteoporosis), which can result in an increased risk of fragility fractures. Most individuals with hyperparathyroidism do not develop all these symptoms, especially when the condition is diagnosed early and treated.
PANCREAS AND DUODENUMDuodeno-pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors occur in over 80% of MEN type 1 patients. The pancreas is a small gland located behind the stomach. It contains specialized endocrine cells called islet cells, which secrete several hormones including insulin (which lowers blood sugar levels), glucagon (which raises blood sugar levels) and hormones that travel to the intestines and aid in digestion such as gastrin. The duodenum is the first portion of the small intestine, which connects the intestines to the stomach.
Approximately 40 percent of adults with MEN type 1 develop multiple gastrinomas, usually located in the first portion of duodenum, and more rarely in the pancreas. Approximately, 50% of MEN1-gastrinomas have already metastasized at the time of clinical diagnosis. Gastrinomas are functioning tumors that secrete gastrin. Elevated levels of gastrin induce the stomach to release too much acid, which, in turn, can result in abdominal pain, diarrhea, backflow of the contents of the stomach into the esophagus (esophageal reflux) and peptic ulcers. Peptic ulcers are open sores lining the stomach, esophagus, and intestines. Peptic ulcers can cause a burning pain in the stomach, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting and fatty, smelly stools. In severe cases, peptic ulcers can cause serious complications including internal bleeding, vomiting up of blood, obstruction of the passage of food through the digestive tract (gastric outlet obstruction) or the development of a hole in the wall of the stomach or small intestines (perforation), allowing the contents of the stomach or intestines to leak into the abdomen. Less common symptoms associated with gastrinomas include unintended weight loss and heartburn. Gastrinomas and other tumors that arise from islet cells can potentially become malignant and spread (metastasize) to other areas of the body, especially nearby lymph nodes and the liver.
Multiple gastrinomas are also found in a non-syndromic disorder called Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, which usually occurs randomly for unknown reasons.
Additional tumors can affect the pancreas in MEN type 1. Among them, insulinoma, a functioning benign tumor that secretes insulin, is the second most common tumor affecting the endocrine pancreas, occurring in approximately 10 percent of individuals with MEN type 1. Insulinoma can cause low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), especially when not eating over a period of time (fasting). Hypoglycemia can cause a variety of symptoms including confusion, abnormal behavior, blurred vision, double vision, anxiety, heart palpitations, sweating and hunger.
Tumors that secrete too much glucagon or somatostatin (respectively named glucagonomas and somatostatinomas) can also occur in the pancreas islet of MEN type 1 patients, in a lesser percentage. These tumors result in elevated levels of blood sugar (hyperglycemia). Hyperglycemia can cause diabetes.
In rare cases, individuals with MEN type 1 can develop a VIPoma, a tumor that secretes a hormone called vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP). VIPomas can cause chronic, watery diarrhea and eventually cause dehydration.
In approximately 40 percent of patients, non-functioning pancreatic tumors, often multiple, small and scattered to the entire organ, may occur. They do not secrete any active hormone and are not related to the occurrence of any endocrine syndrome. Non-functioning pancreatic tumors may have a malignant potential, mainly for tumors larger than 2 cm in diameter.
PITUITARY GLANDApproximately 25 percent of individuals with MEN type 1 develop benign adenoma of the anterior pituitary gland. The pituitary is a small pea-sized gland that sits in the base of brain and is sometimes called “the master gland” because it oversees the function of most of the endocrine glands in the body. The pituitary gland secretes a variety of different hormones including prolactin, which influences fertility and stimulates breast milk production; growth hormone, which regulates body growth especially during adolescence; and several hormones that stimulate the activity of other glands including the adrenal and thyroid glands and ovaries and testes.
In some MEN1 patients, symptoms of pituitary gland involvement may be the first sign of the disorder. Benign tumors that secrete prolactin (prolactinomas) are the most common pituitary gland tumors associated with MEN type 1. They are the third most common tumors associated with MEN type 1 after parathyroid tumors and gastrinomas. In females, prolactinomas can cause irregular menstrual periods (oligomenorrhea to amenorrhea), infertility, diminished sexual drive, painful intercourse and the production of breast milk in females who are not pregnant (galactorrhea). The most common clinical manifestations in males are impotence and gynecomastia.
Pituitary tumors, especially when more than 1 centimeter in diameter (macrodenoma), can result in additional symptoms because they can apply pressure upon other tissues of the brain. Resulting symptoms may include headaches and visual problems, such as blurred vision.
In addition to prolactinoma, other tumors affecting the pituitary gland may occur. One of these tumors can secrete excess growth hormone resulting in a condition characterized by excessive bone growth and enlargement of certain structures of the body such as the jaw, hands and feet (acromegaly) in post-puberal patients. Another of these tumors may secrete adrenocorticotrophin (ACTH), a hormone that stimulates the adrenal glands, which results in excessive corticosteroid production. Excessive corticosteroid levels can eventually cause a condition called Cushing’s syndrome which is characterized by a wide variety of signs and symptoms including a rounded face (moon face), increased fat around the neck, weight gain around the midsection and upper back, muscle weakness, fatigue and high blood pressure.
ADRENAL GLAND TUMORSThe adrenal glands are located on top of the kidneys and are constituted by cortex and medulla. Both adrenal cortex and adrenal medulla secrete hormones to regulate the functions of the body; the cortex produces steroid hormones (glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, and adrenal androgens), while the medulla produces the catecholamines (epinephrine, and norepinephrine).
In approximately 20-40% of patients with MEN1, non-functioning tumors of the adrenal glands may occur. In rare cases, functioning adrenal gland tumors of the cortex result in the overproduction of corticosteroid hormones and the development of Cushing’s syndrome. In extremely rare cases, about 1%, a pheochromocytoma (PHEO) may occur in an individual with MEN type 1. Most PHEOs originate in the inner layer (medulla) of one of the two adrenal glands. Symptoms may include high blood pressure, headaches, excessive sweating and heart palpitations. PHEOs occur much more often in individuals with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2.
CARCINOID TUMORSApproximately 10-15% of individuals with MEN type 1 develop slow-growing carcinoid tumors. These tumors usually develop in the stomach (gastric carcinoids), bronchial tubes (bronchial carcinoids) and the thymus (thymic carcinoids), a small gland located in the upper chest just behind the breastbone. Carcinoid tumors of the bronchial tubes primarily affect females; carcinoid tumors of the thymus primarily affect males. Gastric carcinoids may usually develop in MEN type 1 patients affected by ZES, and since hypergastrinemia is a promoter for gastric carcinoid proliferation, the best method for preventing the development of these tumors is the surgical resection of gastrinoma.
In most patients, these tumors do not produce hormones (non-functioning tumors) and usually do not cause any symptoms (asymptomatic), but they can present a rapid growth and malignant progression being responsible for some MEN1-asscociated deaths. In rare cases, carcinoid tumors may overproduce different hormones including ACTH, calcitonin, growth hormone releasing hormone (GHRH), serotonin and histamine. When carcinoid tumors secrete serotonin, they can cause carcinoid syndrome, a condition characterized by migraines, diarrhea and episodes of feeling flushed.
Carcinoid tumors associated with MEN type 1 are usually identified later during life, with a mean diagnosis of age 50. These tumors may be benign, but malignant (cancerous) carcinoids can develop. Thymic carcinoids associated with MEN type 1 may be particularly aggressive, especially in male smokers.
NON-ENDOCRINE BENIGN TUMORSSeveral tumors that do not arise from endocrine cells may also occur in individuals with MEN type 1. The most common is lipoma, a benign tumor consisting of fat cells. Lipomas usually develop just under the surface of the skin and are common in the general population. Multiple lipomas often form. Lipomas are not usually associated with any symptoms. Some individuals with MEN type 1 may also develop benign raised, reddish spots on the face (angiofibroma) and benign, raised, whitish spots on the skin (collagenomas).
Less common, non-endocrine, benign tumors associated with MEN type 1 include tumors arising from the membranes (meninges) lining the brain and spinal cord (meningioma), tumors arising from smooth muscle cells (leiomyoma) and tumors arising from central nervous system tissue (ependymomas). These tumors generally do not cause any symptoms.

