Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2

synonyms:
MEN-2MEN2 syndromeSipple syndrome

overview:
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) is a rare genetic polyglandular cancer syndrome, characterized by the presence of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) and an increased risk of develop other specific tumors affecting other glands of the endocrine system.
The endocrine system is the network of glands that secrete hormones into the bloodstream to reach distant target tissues and organs within the body. Hormones are active molecules, which through their binding to specific receptors in the target cells, regulate the chemical processes (metabolism) that influence vital processes and functions of various organs.
MEN2 endocrine tumors may secrete excessive amounts of hormones into the bloodstream, which can result in a variety of symptoms.
MEN2 syndrome is caused by disease-causing changes (pathogenic variants) in theRETgene and it includes two main clinical subtypes characterized by different clinical characteristics (phenotype) and by different variants in theRETgene:
MEN2A (accounting for 95% of all MEN2 cases), characterized by medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) in association with tumors of the inner part of the adrenal gland called pheocromocytoma (PHEO) or tumors of the parathyroid gland called adenoma, or both in some patients.
MEN2A includes four subvariants:
Classical MEN2A (MTC with PHEO or PHPT, or both)MEN2A with cutaneous lichen amyloidosisMEN2A with Hirschsprung diseaseFMTC (families or individuals withRETgermline variants who develop only MTC)
MEN2B (accounting for less than 5% of all MEN2 cases) is characterized by an earlier onset and more severe MTC that presents in all affected people and by PHEO but not primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT).
The estimated prevalence of MEN2A is about 1/40,000, while MEN2B varies between 1/350,000 to 1/700,000.
MEN2A can run in families (familial cases) or can occur as the result of a spontaneous genetic change called a new orde novovariant in theRETgene that occurs randomly for no apparent reason in the developing embryo that is not inherited. MEN2B usually occurs as the result of ade novogenetic variant in the developing embryo. Treatment includes surgery and specific medication.

symptoms:
The onset, progression and specific symptoms of each case of MEN2 can vary. Some individuals may only develop mild symptoms; others may develop serious, life-threatening complications. Some individuals may develop symptoms during infancy or early childhood; others may not develop symptoms until adolescence or young adulthood. Some cases of MEN2 may not become apparent until later during adulthood. Clinical features (phenotype) are associated with a specific RETgene variant, and, therefore, MEN2A and MEN2B are associated with differentRETgene variants.
Nearly all individuals with MEN2 develop medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), usually very early in life. Additional symptoms vary depending upon the specific subtype of the syndrome.
The three endocrine glands most often affected in MEN2 syndrome are the thyroid, the adrenal glands and only in the MEN2A variants, the parathyroids.
The thyroid is a small, butterfly-shaped gland located in the front of the neck. The thyroid absorbs iodine (a substance found in many foods) from the blood. The thyroid converts iodine into thyroid hormones, which are essential to regulate the chemical processes (metabolism) of virtually every cell in the body.The adrenal glands are located on top of the kidneys and produce two hormones called epinephrine and norepinephrine. Other hormones produced by the adrenal glands help to regulate the fluid and electrolyte balance in the body.The parathyroid glands are four very small glands (approximately the size of a pea) located in the neck that secrete parathyroid hormone (PTH), the main regulator of calcium homeostasis and serum calcium level.
Depending on the specific subtypes, signs and symptoms include:(It is important to note that individual cases are highly variable and that not all the affected individuals will develop all the symptoms discussed below).
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2A (MEN2A)
The signs and symptom of MEN2A may include:
Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), present in almost all the cases of MEN2A, a form of aggressive cancer that spreads easily and arises from thyroid cells called C cells (parafollicular cells), which produce the hormone calcitonin that helps with the calcium homeostasis by reducing circulating levels of calcium.Overgrowth (hyperplasia) of thyroid cells (C-cell hyperplasia), a condition that is a benign process but is considered a precursor to the development of MTC.Signs of MTC can be seen early during childhood and include:A painful mass in the neck that develops between 15 to 20 years of age in most cases. If MTC is not detected and treated during childhood (this mass in the thyroid or an abnormal enlargement of nearby lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy) can be the first sign of the MTC).MTC can spread (metastasize) to other areas of the body and may result in:chronic diarrhea because of the overproduction of calcitoninabdominal painjaundicebone pain or tenderness in rare casesPheochromocytoma (PHEO), present in about 50% of individuals with MEN2A, a usually benign tumor of the adrenal glands that may affect both the adrenal glands (bilateral PHEO) and in rare cases, can be the first sign of MEN2A.A PHEO arises from certain cells of the inner layer of the adrenal glands (adrenal medulla), known as chromaffin cells, which produce hormones necessary for the body to function properly.PHEO produces norepinephrine and epinephrine, hormones that are involved with the sympathetic nervous system which controls various involuntary activities in the body such as raising blood pressure or regulating the heartbeat.Symptoms associated with PHEO include:high blood pressure (hypertension) that does not improve with treatment (intractable hypertension)chronic headachesexcessive sweatingheart palpitationsNervousnessanxietyloss of color (blanching) of the skin (associated with high blood pressure)In some people, an undetected PHEO can potentially cause life-threatening complications such as hypertensive crisis during procedures requiring anesthesia.hypertensive crisis is a severe increase in blood pressure that can damage blood vessels and lead to a stroke. However, because of better diagnosis, recognition and therapies regarding PHEO, such life-threatening complications are rare in individuals with MEN2 who develop PHEO.PHEO is almost always benign (noncancerous), but in approximately 4% of MEN2A patients, malignant transformation can occur.Primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT) in about 20%-30% of MEN2A, due to an overgrowth (hyperplasia) of the parathyroid tissue or development of a benign tumor in the parathyroid glands (adenoma); one to four glands can be affected during lifetime.The parathyroid glands are four very small glands (approximately the size of a pea) located in the neck that secrete PTH, the main hormonal regulator of calcium homeostasis and serum calcium level, which increases circulating levels of calcium and may result in primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT).Hyperparathyroidism is a clinical condition indicating a prolonged high level of circulating PTHHyperparathyroidism can be very mild and may not cause any obvious symptoms (asymptomatic) in most people, especially when the condition is diagnosed early.In some people, hyperparathyroidism can result in persistent elevated serum level of calcium (hypercalcemia), which can eventually cause kidney stones or damage the kidneys or be responsible for bone demineralization (osteoporosis) and increased risk of fragility fractures.Hyperparathyroidism-derived hypercalcemia can cause additional symptoms including fatigue, weakness, constipation, nausea, ulcers, indigestion, high blood pressure (hypertension) and muscle or bone pain as well as neurological problems such as mental status changes, lethargy, depression and confusion.
In addition to the classical MEN2A, there are other two, extremely rare variants which have additional specific symptoms in addition to MTC, PHEO and hyperparathyroidism.
MEN2A associated with cutaneous lichen amyloidosis(CLA), a condition in which a scaly, itchy skin rash develops due to the accumulation of certain proteins (amyloids) in the skin. These skin lesions are particularly evident in the scapular region of the back and have as a classical symptom, an intense itching that improves with sun exposure and worsens during periods of stress. In some patients, the CLA may be present at a young age and manifest prior to the onset of clinically evident MTC, thus serving as a sign for an early diagnosis of the syndrome.
MEN2A associated with Hirschsprung disease, a gastrointestinal condition characterized by absence of certain nerve cell bodies (ganglia) in the smooth muscle wall within a region of the large intestine (i.e., colon). As a result, there is absence or impairment of the involuntary, rhythmic contractions that propel food through the GI tract (peristalsis). Symptoms of Hirschsprung disease include constipation, vomiting, loss of appetite, bloating or swelling (distention) of the abdomen, abnormal accumulation of feces within the colon and widening of the colon above the affected segment (megacolon). Hirschsprung disease can eventually cause diarrhea, dehydration and failure to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive).
Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Type 2B
The MEN2B subtype accounts for about 5% of all cases of MEN2. MEN2B was formerly called MEN type 3 (MEN3); currently MEN2B is considered a clinically more aggressive variant of MEN2. It is characterized by the occurrence of MTC, PHEO and absence of PHPT, and by additional symptoms. Associated symptoms can vary greatly from one person to another. Some symptoms can be very subtle in some people.
MTC usually occurs earlier in MEN2B than in MEN2A and is usually more aggressive. A neck mass may be detectable during childhood. Most affected children have surgery to remove their thyroid at an early age because MTC can potentially spread (metastasize) at a very early age. A prophylactic thyroidectomy is suggested during the first year of life for children with some specificRETgene variants associated with a particularly aggressive form of MTC.
PHEO occurs in approximately 50% of cases of MEN2B (50% of them being bilateral PHEO), with no differences in occurrence and clinical presentation from individuals with MEN2A.
As commented, people affected with MEN2B may also have additional symptoms that do not occur in the MEN2A subtypes which may include:
Development, during infancy or early childhood, of multiple, benign tumors, called neuromas, arising from certain nerve cells.MEN2B neuromas usually affect the mucous membranes (mucosa) lining the surface of the tongue, lips, the roof of the mouth (palate), eyelids, voice box (larynx), pharynx and nasal passages. The conjunctiva, the thin, clear membrane that covers the whites of the eyes, may also be affected.The presence of multiple neuromas can cause affected areas to appear swollen such as the lips, which often appear full and prominent.Distinctive facial features in Infants and children with MEN2B including eyelids that are flared forwarded (anteverted), broad-based nose, a wide-expression, and a coarse, elongated facial appearance.Benign growths arising from nerve cells called ganglion cells may also occur (ganglioneuromatosis).Ganglioneuromas occur in the gastrointestinal tract and may cause swelling (distention) of the abdomen, diarrhea, constipation and an abnormally enlarged colon (megacolon).Affected infants often fail to gain weight and grow at the expected rate for age and sex (failure to thrive).
Some individuals with MEN2B may develop additional symptoms including a sunken breastbone (pectus excavatum), lax or loose joints, abnormal curvature of the spine, muscle weakness and a “marfanoid habitus”, a condition in which affected individuals tend to be thin with unusually tall stature; long, slender fingers and toes (arachnodactyly) and elongated arms and legs. Note that the term “marfanoid” refers to Marfan syndrome, a distinct genetic disorder in which these findings are characteristic. MEN2B is unrelated to Marfan syndrome other than sharing some similarities in body build.
Familial Medullary Thyroid CarcinomaBy definition, familial medullary thyroid carcinoma (FMTC) must occur in at least four members of a family in the absence of additional signs and symptoms MEN2A or MEN2B such as PHEO or parathyroid adenoma. MTC is less aggressive in this variant than other MEN2A variants and MEN2B familial form than when it is associated with MEN2A or MEN2B. Onset is usually during adulthood. FMTC is now considered a milder variant of MEN2A.

