Multiple System Atrophy

synonyms:
MSAprogressive autonomic failure with multiple system atrophyShy-Drager syndrome (SDS)sporadic olivopontocerebellar atrophy (sOPCA)striatonigral degeneration (SND

overview:
Summary
Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is a rare sporadic progressive neurological disorder characterized by a varying combination of symptoms and signs. Onset is during adulthood (>30 years). Affected individuals may experience symptoms similar to those found in Parkinson’s disease (parkinsonism); cerebellar signs such as progressive impairment of the ability to coordinate voluntary movements (cerebellar ataxia); and impaired functioning of the portion of the nervous system (autonomic nervous system) that regulates certain involuntary body functions (autonomic failure) such as heart rate, blood pressure, sweating, and bowel and bladder control. When parkinsonian symptoms predominate, the disorder may be referred to as MSA-P (parkinsonian phenotype); when the cerebellar symptoms predominate the disorder may be referred to as MSA-C (cerebellar phenotype). The exact cause of MSA is unknown.
Introduction
The term multiple system atrophy was first introduced in the medical literature in 1969. It encompasses three presentations of a single disease formerly thought to be separate disorders, specifically Shy-Drager syndrome (which emphasized autonomic dysfunction), striatonigral degeneration (which emphasized parkinsonian symptoms), and sporadic olivopontocerebellar atrophy (which emphasized cerebellar symptoms), although the cases of each of these that were originally described presented a combination of all three clinical features, and brain pathology was found in both the striatonigral and olivopontocerebellar structures. Additionally, there is a hereditary form of olivopontocerebellar atrophy that is not part of the multiple system atrophy spectrum.

symptoms:
The range, severity, and distribution of symptoms vary greatly among affected individuals. For example, some may initially have only mild symptoms for several years; others may experience severe symptoms early in the course of the disease. Symptoms of MSA may vary depending upon which form of MSA predominates. The disorder can cause the progressive loss of motor skills and approximately 50% of individuals are wheelchair-bound within 5-6 years of the onset of motor symptoms. Eventually, affected individuals may become confined to bed and experience life-threatening complications.
Some affected individuals experience fatigue; a complaint of weakness, especially of the legs; blurred vision; and impaired bladder and bowel control including involuntary urination or defecation (urinary and rectal incontinence). Additional bladder disturbances may occur including the need to pass water at night, increased daytime frequency of urinating, an increased urgency to urinate, and incomplete bladder emptying. Erectile dysfunction is almost universal, and typically early, in affected males. Constipation may also be present. The skin may become extremely dry as a result of a decreased ability to sweat (anhidrosis). All cases of MSA will eventually develop some form of autonomic dysfunction (urogenital, cardiovascular, or both).
The symptoms mentioned above may be preceded or followed by neurological findings that are similar to those found in individuals with Parkinson’s disease (parkinsonism). Approximately 90 percent of individuals with MSA will experience parkinsonism symptoms including slowness of voluntary movements (bradykinesia), muscle stiffness (rigidity) which may make it difficult to bend the arms and/or legs, and impaired balance (postural instability). Two thirds of patients have a tremor or jerky movements (myoclonus) of the hands or fingers, but rarely (<10%) the classical “pill-rolling” rest tremor characteristic of most cases of Parkinson’s disease..
In approximately 20 percent of MSA cases, cerebellar signs may be the initial findings. These comprise progressive impairment of the ability to coordinate voluntary movements (cerebellar ataxia), progressive balance problems (disequilibrium), slurred speech (dysarthria), and jerkiness of following eye movements (nystagmus).
Additional neurological findings may include exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia); and increased muscle tone (spasticity), collectively called pyramidal signs, that can contribute to slowness and stiffness; and involuntary sustained muscle spasms (dystonia) of face, jaw, neck, trunk or limbs causing abnormal, sometimes painful, movements and postures, often involving neck flexion (antecollis) and flexion (“camptocormi”) or curvature (“Pisa syndrome”) of the spine.
When divided into the predominance of parkinsonism and cerebellar features, in most parts of the world MSA-P predominates, with 60-80% of cases in different series. However, for unknown reasons MSA-C predominates in Japan with a ratio to MSA-P of about 4:1. As regards initial symptoms, 20-40% of subjects develop autonomic symptoms before other neurological features are detected.
As MSA progresses, functions controlled by the autonomic nervous system become increasingly impaired. Individuals with MSA may develop vocal cord paralysis resulting in hoarseness and high-pitched, noisy respiration (stridor). In some cases, periodic episodes in which breathing is interrupted during sleep (apnea) may develop. (For more information on apnea, choose “sleep apnea” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.) Irregular heart rhythms may also develop. Some individuals may develop painfully cold fingers and toes caused by constriction of small vessels in response to cold (Raynaud’s phenomenon).
Additional sleep disorders such as REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) occur in many individuals with MSA, but RBD is also common, but less so, in PD. Normally, people cannot move during REM sleep, but in RBD they can move and often act out their dreams potentially resulting in self-injury, or injuring their bed-partner.
In some cases, individuals with MSA experience a mild loss of cognitive ability although, unlike Parkinson’s disease, frank dementia is uncommon. In addition, chewing, swallowing, and speaking may become more difficult as the disorder progresses. The symptoms associated with MSA are progressive so that affected individuals may ultimately become unable to walk unassisted, or require a wheelchair, lose the ability to speak or swallow, or develop severe respiratory complications. Continued neurological degeneration can potentially result in severe, life-threatening complications such as aspiration pneumonia or deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism, secondary to immobility.

