Multicentric Osteolysis Nodulosis and Arthropathy Spectrum

synonyms:
MONA spectrum

overview:
Summary
Multicentric osteolysis nodulosis and arthropathy spectrum is a group of rare congenital skeletal disorders characterized by progressive bone loss, joint disease and bumps under the skin. People with these conditions have a loss of bone tissue, especially in the hands and feet; pain, swelling, stiffness and loss of motion in joints located in the hands, feet, knees, wrists, ankles and elbows; and firm, round bumps under the skin of the palms and soles. Other signs and symptoms include coarse facial features, skin abnormalities and heart defects. These conditions are caused by changes (variants) in theMMP2gene orMMP14gene that are typically inherited in a recessive pattern. Treatment is supportive and can include physical therapy, pain management and mobility aids.
Introduction
In the most recent nomenclature of skeletal dysplasias, multicentric osteolysis nodulosis and arthropathy spectrum was the name given to the conditions formerly called Torg syndrome, Torg-Winchester syndrome, Winchester syndrome and multicentric osteolysis nodulosis and arthropathy (MONA). Winchester syndrome is also known asMMP14-related multicentric osteolysis, nodulosis, and arthropathy. MONA is also known asMMP2-related multicentric osteolysis, nodulosis, and arthropathy.

symptoms:
Individuals affected by these conditions have skeletal changes that involve thinning or weakening of the bone (multifocal osteoporosis), progressive loss of bone tissue (osteolysis) and low bone mineral density (osteopenia) which lead to degenerative changes in bones of the hands, feet, elbows, shoulders, knees, hips and spine. Loss of bone tissue and density can lead to a short stature and brittle bones that can lead to frequent bone fractures. In some individuals, spine degeneration can cause a sideways curvature of the spine (scoliosis) and forward rounding of the spine (kyphosis).
Almost all individuals affected by these conditions have joint abnormalities. Bone destruction can lead to progressive joint disease (arthropathy) that includes pain, swelling, stiffness and a reduced range of motion in the joints (contracture).  Small joints of the hands and feet are the most commonly affected, but other sites near bone destruction can be involved including knees, wrists, ankles and elbows.
Skin abnormalities typically occur in individuals with these conditions. Firm, round bumps can appear under the skin (subcutaneous nodules) in the palms and soles of feet. These nodules may or may not be painful.
Some individuals have skin thickening, excessively dark patches of skin (hyperpigmentation) with or without damage to the skin (lesions) and folds of extra skin in the hands and feet where destruction of underlying bone has occurred.
Most affected individuals have coarse facial features that can include a large and round tip of the nose (bulbous nose); misalignment of the eyes where one eye aligns inward toward the nose or outward away from the nose while the other eye remains focused (strabismus); and bulging of one or both eyes (proptosis). Some individuals have large and inflamed gums (hypertrophic gums). A few individuals may have clouding of the clear front covering of the eye (corneal opacity).
About one third of affected children are born with heart defects. These may include transposition of the great arteries, atrial septal defect, ventricular septal defect, bicuspid valves or mitral valve prolapse.

