Multiple Sclerosis

synonyms:
MS

overview:
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic neuroimmunologic (both the nervous system and the immunological system are involved) disorder of the central nervous system involving the brain, spinal cord and optic nerves. By means of a mechanism not clearly understood, the protective fatty, insulating substance called myelin sheath that covers the nerve is destroyed. The inflammatory attacks that produce the characteristic scarring (plaques or patches) of the myelin sheath occurs unpredictability, vary in intensity, and at many sites thus the name, multiple sclerosis. During the course of the disease, patients may have attacks (relapses or exacerbations), gradually worsen (progression), or stabilize. The randomness of the location of damage can result in a wide range of neurological symptoms, which may vary from person to person. Recently it has been learned that the nerve fibers themselves (axons), in addition to the myelin sheaths, are also affected early in the MS disease process. Damage to axons is irreversible thus clinicians recommend early treatment with one of the disease-modifying agents (see below).

symptoms:
The symptoms of multiple sclerosis may vary greatly. Some people may have visual impairment (including central visual fields), double vision (diplopia), or involuntary rhythmic movements of the eyes (nystagmus). People with multiple sclerosis may also experience impairment of speech, numbness or tingling sensation in the limbs and difficulty walking. Dysfunction of the bladder and bowel may also be present along with sexual dysfunction. Multiple sclerosis is rarely fatal; the average life expectancy is 93 percent of that of the general population. In some cases however, changes in mobility make it necessary to use a cane, crutches, or other mobility devises. In a limited number of patients, the disease may result in life-threatening complications.
In order to illustrate by how much symptoms of MS may vary, the National Multiple Sclerosis Society (NMSS) cites a study of 697 persons with MS who experienced the following symptoms in addition to pain, depression and other emotional changes:
Fatigue—————————–88%Ambulation problems———- 87%Bowel/Bladder problems——65%Visual Disturbances———–-58%Cognitive problems————44%Tremor—————————–41%Difficulty moving arms———41%
Over the past decade it has become common for clinical researchers to classify MS into several types. These types were originally proposed to improve experimental design but are used often at this time as a guide to treatment options. MS is classified as:
Relapsing Remitting MS (RRMS)This form of MS is characterized by clearly defined acute to subacute attacks with varying degrees of recovery often complete or nearly complete early in the disease course. Between attacks, the disease is stable. About 85% of initial diagnoses of MS are classified as RRMS. More recently the term “relapsing form of MS” has been used to identify patients with any clinical form of MS that demonstrate a clinical relapse. One could also logically posit that a new T2 lesion or a gadolinium enhancing lesion on MRI scan is the equivalent of a relapse.
Secondary-Progressive MS (SPMS)SPMS begins as RRMS. SPMS is characterized by progressive disability at a variable rate that may be accompanied by relapses, minor remissions, and plateaus. Of the people with an initial diagnosis of RRMS, 50% or more will develop SPMS within 10 years and 90% within 25 years. It is important to remember that most of these numbers are based on studies preceding the era of disease modifying therapy.
Primary Progressive MS (PPMS)From onset, PPMS shows steady rates of progression of disability or occasional plateaus and/or minor remissions. We now recognize that a small number of these patients may have superimposed clinical relapses and/or PPMS makes up about 15% of all MS diagnoses.Clinical Isolated Syndrome (CIS)Clinical isolated syndrome is the first episode of a neurologic event involving the central nervous system that is typical of multiple sclerosis. The suspicion and likelihood of an episode of CIS being the first attack increases with abnormalities on MRI of the brain and/or spinal cord
Radiologically Isolated Syndrome (RIS)Radiologically isolated syndrome is likely the preclinical stage of MS. It is defined as lesions typical of MS on an MRI scan done for a different reason such as headache, head injury or other reasons that are not as a result of symptoms not suggestive or typical of MS. Follow up of many of these individuals frequently demonstrates additional lesions typical of MS and/or a clinical event (CIS) and then RRMS. Some individuals go on to a clinical course of PPMS.
Tumefactive MS is a rare form of MS characterized by a tumor-like lesion and signs and symptoms similar to those of a brain tumor. Symptoms often differ from other types of MS and may include headaches, changes in thinking, confusion, speech problems, seizures, and weakness.  Tumefactive MS often but not always develops into RRMS.
Pediatric MS is a rare form of MS. Approximately 3-5% of MS patients are diagnosed in childhood (under 18 years of age). It can be difficult to diagnose MS in young children because the symptoms overlap with many other conditions and the signs and symptoms can be different from adult-onset MS.

