Mulvihill-Smith Syndrome

synonyms:
progeriod short stature with pigmented nevi

overview:
Summary
Mulvihill-Smith syndrome is an extremely rare and complex disorder that is clinically diagnosed based on the following characteristics: abnormally small head (microcephaly), multiple non-cancerous moles (pigmented nevi), short height, reoccurring infections due to an impaired immune system, impaired hearing, dental anomalies (hypodontia), intellectual disability and decreased fat in the face that causes “bird-like” facial features. Affected individuals appear more aged and can develop illness associated with older age such as tumors, and this is why Mulvihill-Smith syndrome has been categorized as a premature aging disease (progeroid syndrome). Mulvihill-Smith syndrome is an extremely rare disorder with only 11 cases documented in the scientific literature worldwide.
Introduction
Mulvihill-Smith syndrome was first described by Dr. Mulvihill  and Dr. Smith in 1971, when they observed a 17 old patient with a cluster of symptoms never seen in one individual, including premature aging, reoccurring infections, microcephaly, deafness, numerous moles, short stature and decreased facial fat. Subsequently, 10 other people with Mulvihill-Smith syndrome have been reported in the scientific literature. With only 11 documented cases, Mulvihill-Smith syndrome is extremely rare and has been very difficult to study. No gene(s) that cause Mulvihill-Smith syndrome has been identified, consequently the disease is diagnosed based on the symptoms. People with Mulvihill-Smith syndrome have been diagnosed as isolated cases suggesting it arises from a new spontaneous mutation in a gene or gene(s). Because of the rarity of the disorder, most physicians are unlikely to be familiar with Mulvihill-Smith syndrome. Most individuals have been diagnosed between 5-30 years of age.

symptoms:
Mulvihill-Smith syndrome is diagnosed based on a series of symptoms described in the scientific literature. There can be some variation of symptoms between affected individuals. The core symptoms include the following:
Abnormally small head (microcephaly)– Microcephaly is a rare condition in which a child’s head size is significantly smaller compared to children of the same age and sex. Microcephaly is usually caused by abnormal brain development in the womb or failure of the brain to grow after birth. This characteristic has been reported in a 100% of individuals diagnosed with Mulvihill-Smith syndrome.
Intellectual disabilities– Children with microcephaly tend to have intellectual disabilities that range from mild to severe. 82% of individuals diagnosed with Mulvihill-Smith syndrome had some type of intellectual disabilities. In most patients, intellectual disabilities result from slower brain development during childhood, but in a few patients, some cognitive deterioration in adulthood has also been reported.
Psychological symptoms– Individuals diagnosed with Mulvihill-Smith syndrome have been reported to have various psychological symptoms such as major mood swings, periods of agitation, aggression, depression and insomnia. Sleep disorders have also been reported.
Abnormal facial features– Individuals with Mulvihill-Smith syndrome can have various abnormal facial features. The majority of diagnosed patients (10/11) showed reduced levels of the layer of fatty tissue directly beneath the skin of the face (facial subcutaneous fat). In 4 patients, abnormally large distance between the eyes (hypertelorism) was reported. In addition, affected individuals may have an abnormally small face, a severely underdeveloped jaw (micrognathia), a small, pointed chin; and/or absence of one or more teeth (hypodontia). Taken together, these changes in facial features lead to a narrower face and several scientific papers described patients as having a “bird-like” facial appearance. The abnormal structures in the face may be the reason these patients often have a high pitched voice (reported in 9 cases).
Sensory issues– Deafness has been reported in 91% of individuals diagnosed with Mulvihill-Smith syndrome. Clouding of lens in the eye that can impair vision (cataracts) have been reported in three individuals with Mulvihill-Smith syndrome.
Shortness in height and other anatomic abnormalities– Short stature is a central characteristic of Mulvihill-Smith syndrome, as it has been reported in 91% of individuals. In addition, some afflicted individuals may have physical characteristics such as abnormally bent or curved fingers (clinodactyly) and shortened fingers and toes (brachydactyly). Some affected children may have an abnormal sideways curvature of the spine involving the chest (thoracic scoliosis) and/or impaired joint mobility. Some affected males may have genital abnormalities such as abnormal placement of the urinary opening (meatus) on the underside of the penis (hypospadias), causing the penis to point downward (chordee). Low birth weight has been reported as a common trait in patients diagnosed with Mulvihill-Smith syndrome.
Impaired immune system (immunodeficiency)– The ability of the body’s immune system to fight invading organisms seems to be impaired in individuals with Mulvihill-Smith syndrome. In several patients, analysis of blood revealed reduced levels of key cells of the immune system (T- and B-cells). In addition, reoccurring infection occured in 91% of individuals diagnosed with Mulvihill-Smith syndrome. Impaired immune function is often associated with increased risk of cancer, and 4 patients had various tumors (gastric, tongue, pancreas, and melanoma). These cancers occurred in individuals aged 16-28 years old. An impaired immune system is seen as a hallmark characteristic of Mulvihill-Smith syndrome, and often used to distinguish it from other premature aging diseases such as Cockayne syndrome.
Multiple non-cancerous moles (pigmented nevi)– 100% of patients with Mulvihill-Smith syndrome have been reported to have excessive moles on the face. These pigmented nevi may be present at birth (congenital) or shortly after birth. A high number of moles is a symptom seen in several other diseases associated with a compromised immune system. Some infants and children with Mulvihill-Smith syndrome also have numerous freckles or dark pigmented lesions (pigmented spitz nevus) on the skin of the face, neck, hands, trunk and/or other parts of the body.
Premature aging (progeroid syndrome)– Individuals with Mulvihill-Smith syndrome have been described as looking older in their physical appearance, particularly the face. This advanced aging appearance along with the fact that affected individuals develop conditions more often seen in older populations such as cataracts, cancer and vulnerability to infections has led to this condition being described as a progeroid syndrome. Some patients with Mulvihill-Smith syndrome have been reported to have elevated levels of cholesterol (hypercholesterolemia), another condition usually observed in older populations. Mulvihill-Smith syndrome is one of about 30 diseases associated with premature aging.

