Myasthenia Gravis

synonyms:
MG

overview:
Myasthenia gravis is a neuromuscular disorder primarily characterized by muscle weakness and muscle fatigue. Although the disorder usually becomes apparent during adulthood, symptom onset may occur at any age. The condition may be restricted to certain muscle groups, particularly those of the eyes (ocular myasthenia), or may become more generalized (generalized myasthenia gravis), involving multiple muscle groups. Most individuals with myasthenia gravis develop weakness and drooping of the eyelids (ptosis); weakness of eye muscles, resulting in double vision (diplopia); and excessive muscle fatigue following activity. Additional features commonly include weakness of facial muscles; impaired speech (dysarthria); difficulties chewing and swallowing (dysphagia); and weakness of the upper arms and legs (proximal limb weakness). In addition, in about 10 percent of patients, affected individuals may develop potentially life-threatening complications due to severe involvement of muscles used during breathing (myasthenic crisis). Myasthenia gravis results from an abnormal immune reaction in which the body’s natural immune defenses (i.e., antibodies) inappropriately attack and gradually injure certain receptors in muscles that receive nerve impulses (antibody-mediated autoimmune response).

symptoms:
Symptoms may be variable, with disease involvement potentially localized to certain muscles or affecting multiple muscles. In some affected individuals, the disease process may be limited to certain eye muscles, which is often described as “ocular myasthenia.” In those with more generalized disease or “generalized myasthenia gravis,” affected muscles may include those of the eyes, face, jaw, and throat region; arm and leg (limb) muscles; and muscles involved in breathing (respiratory muscles).
The disorder often begins with weakness of muscles controlling the eyes, resulting in drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis), double vision (diplopia), or both. Individuals may also develop weakness of muscles of the face, jaw, and throat. In such cases, associated symptoms may include difficulties speaking (dysarthria), causing the voice to sound weak, hoarse, or “nasally,” and increasing chewing and swallowing difficulties (dysphagia) during the course of meals, leading to choking, coughing, or inhalation (aspiration) of food or liquids. Some individuals may also develop limb weakness and easy fatigability of arm and leg muscles. In approximately 10 percent of patients, myasthenic crisis or sudden severe weakness of the jaw and throat (oropharyngeal) or respiratory muscles occurs, requiring respiratory assistance. Sudden worsening of weakness may be triggered by infections, severe stress, surgery, or a reduction or sudden increase of prednisone. Patients with antibodies to MuSK may develop muscle atrophy, in particular of facial and tongue muscles.
The course of the myasthenia gravis is highly variable. For example, the degree of muscle weakness may vary over hours, from day to day, or over weeks and months, tending to increase with repeated muscle use and to improve with rest. In addition, particularly during the first years after disease onset, some affected individuals may experience alternating periods in which symptoms temporarily subside or worsen (remissions and exacerbations). A short-term aggravation of symptoms may be triggered by a variety of factors, including infection, excessive physical activity, menstruation, and after delivery of a child.
Infants of mothers who have myasthenia gravis may develop a temporary (transient) form of the disorder beginning within approximately 48 hours after birth. Known as transient neonatal myasthenia gravis, the condition may be characterized by generalized muscle weakness and low muscle tone (hypotonia); impaired sucking or swallowing; a weak cry; respiratory insufficiency; and/or little spontaneous movement. Such abnormalities may be present for days to weeks, after which affected infants have normal muscle strength.
Congenital myasthenia is caused by genetic defects of muscle and nerve communication (neuromuscular transmission), andnot an abnormal immune system. Congenital myasthenia usually occurs in infants but may become evident in adulthood. Other features may vary in severity among patients. Such abnormalities may include feeding difficulties, sudden episodes of reduced breathing (apnea), failure to grow and gain weight at an expected rate, muscle weakness and fatigue, weakness or paralysis of eye muscles (ophthalmoplegia), and other abnormalities.

