Myhre Syndrome

synonyms:
laryngotracheal stenosis, arthropathy, prognathism, and short statureLAPS Syndrome

overview:
Summary

Myhre syndrome is a rare, but increasingly diagnosed genetic disorder characterized by short stature, characteristic facial features, distinctive heart and aorta problems, mild to moderate intellectual disability, autism/autistic-like behavior, and various bone and joint abnormalities. The familiar facial features are often mild in very young children, but present in almost all individuals. These include a small narrow eye opening (blepharophimosis, short palpebral fissure), flat facial profile (maxillary hypoplasia), and a relatively prominent nose. The chin is small in young children, but over time, there is often a prominent jaw (prognathism). Other findings include hearing impairment, short fingers and toes (brachydactyly), muscles that appear abnormally large (muscular pseudohypertrophy), joint stiffness, and narrowing (stenosis) of the voice box (larynx) and windpipe (trachea). Abnormalities of the heart structure (congenital heart defects), heart muscle (cardiomyopathy) and pericardium are common and distinctive.  A risk for certain types of cancer is recognized. Myhre syndrome is caused by mutations (pathologic variants) in theSMAD4gene. It was thought that all molecularly proven cases were due to a de novo mutation (a new gene change that arises around the time of conception, not carried by the parents). However, it has been reported that Myhre syndrome can be transmitted from parent to child. A person with Myhre syndrome would have a 50-50 chance of transmitting this to each child.

Introduction

Myhre syndrome was first described in two unrelated males in 1981 by Drs. Myhre, Ruvalcaba and Graham. In 1998, the first of a series of papers reported on a similar condition consisting of (L)aryngotracheal stenosis (A)rthropathy, (P)rognathism, (S)hort stature syndrome (LAPS), that was recognized to be the same as Myhre syndrome (Hopkins et al., 1998; Lindor et al., 2002, 2009 and 2012). It was proven that both disorders had the same mutation in the same gene (SMAD4). This was viewed as different expression (variants) of the same disorder. Part of the variable expression of Myhre syndrome is related to the age of diagnosis. Of the four variants in SMAD4, it is not yet known whether there are correlations between the specific variant and clinical features.

symptoms:
Although researchers have been able to describe a recognizable syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about the disorder is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified patients and the lack of large clinical studies prevent physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. No other genes have been identified to cause Myhre syndrome. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below and that every patient is unique. Parents of affected children and adults with Myhre syndrome should talk to their primary care physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
Growth deficiency is a common finding and usually occurs before birth (prenatally), often resulting in low birth weight. Growth deficiencies continue after birth and most children are shorter than would be expected for age (short stature). Puberty has occurred early in some patients, while in others it has been delayed. Affected females may experience absence of menstruation (amenorrhea), irregular menstruation, or early-onset heavy menstruation. Affected males may experience failure of the testes to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism). Some have premature puberty.
Most affected infants and children have distinctive facial features including eyes which are small and narrow (blepharophimosis, short palpebral fissure), underdeveloped midfacial structures (maxillary hypoplasia), and prominent nose. The jaw can be small in childhood, but is usually prominent later in life and occasionally pointed (prognathism). Affected individuals may also have a shorter than normal groove in the upper lip (philtrum), thin lips, an unusually narrow mouth, and small ears.
The airway can be affected at various levels such as narrowing or blockage of the nasal airway by tissue (choanal atresia). Further down, there can be progressive narrowing of the larynx and trachea, a condition known as laryngotracheal stenosis. This results in noisy breathing (stridor), a loud cough (croup) and respiratory insufficiency sometimes requiring oxygen or breathing tubes (tracheostomy). Without treatment, laryngotracheal stenosis can cause life-threatening complications; the condition can recur after treatment. The risk for this condition appears to increase with age and it usually presents in adolescence or young adulthood.
In a few affected individuals, the trachea itself and the branches can be narrowed because of the accumulation of tissue. The lungs may be unable to take in enough air for the affected person to breathe properly (bronchopulmonary insufficiency). This condition may result from obstructive or restrictive disorders of the respiratory system or due to narrowing (stenosis) of the pulmonary arteries. Bronchopulmonary insufficiency can potentially cause life-threatening breathing difficulties. In addition, the rib cage is often stiff which limits breathing.
Most individuals with Myhre syndrome develop hearing loss. In some, it is due to the accumulation of wax-like material or from recurrent ear infections. This prevents sound waves from being conducted through the middle ear (conductive hearing loss). Other individuals may have hearing loss due to an impaired ability of the auditory nerves to transmit sensory input from the ears to the brain (sensorineural hearing loss). A few patients have abnormal inner ear structures (dysplasia). Hearing loss can also be mixed, which means individuals have a combination of conductive and sensorineural hearing loss. Most patients have either conductive or mixed. Hearing loss usually affects both ears (bilateral), although the degree of severity varies from one person to another. Narrowing of the tear ducts can occur, but may not be diagnosed as such. Instead there may be persistent tearing or puffiness of the eyes.
Developmental delays occur in all people with Myhre syndrome.  Mild to moderate intellectual disability occurs in most people. Behavioral abnormalities including difficulties with social interactions, poor communication skills, hyperactivity, stubbornness, and/or repetitive behaviors are common.  Many patients are considered to be on the autism spectrum.
Several skeletal abnormalities have been described in individuals with Myhre syndrome. Bones of the skull (calvaria) may be abnormally thick, but this does not harm a person. The ribs may be abnormally broad and wide, and the upper portions of the hip bone may be underdeveloped (hypoplastic iliac wings). The long bones of the body (i.e., those in the arms and legs) may be unusually narrow, round (tubular) and short. The fingers and toes may be short (brachydactyly). Webbing (syndactyly) of the hands and feet, fifth fingers that are curved inward (clinodactyly), and fingers which are stiff and contracted (camptodactyly) are also common findings. Joint involvement is also common and affected individuals may experience stiff joints eventually resulting in limited mobility of small or large joints that may increase with age.
In early childhood, certain muscles may look abnormally large (muscular pseudohypertrophy), especially those of the arms and legs, giving affected individuals a muscular appearance. Progressive stiffening or thickening of the skin may also be noticeable and is quite common. Scars may thicken.Affected individuals may have an increased susceptibility to infections, particularly of the ears and lungs. Narrowing of the airways and the anatomy of the ear may predispose individuals to respiratory and ear infections.
Most people with Myhre syndrome have at least one problem involving the heart or aorta. These can be very mild or occasionally severe. Congenital heart defects are structural problems that are usually present at birth. Later in life there can be pericarditis which involves tightening, or inflammation of the sac around the heart. Pericarditis can be recurrent and progress to cause life-threatening complications and may be associated with pleural effusion (fluid buildup in the chest cavity outside of the lungs). The aorta can have areas of narrowing (stenosis, coarctation). High blood pressure (hypertension) can be present.
Less common signs and symptoms include cleft palate, cleft lip, and drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis). Intestinal problems include chronic constipation, which can lead to inability to be toilet trained. There can be obstruction of the duodenum and pylorus. Renal abnormalities include absence (agenesis) of a kidney or obstruction (hydronephrosis). Eye (ophthalmologic) abnormalities are common and include refraction abnormalities such as an inability to focus on objects which are close (hypermetropia or farsightedness) or an imperfection in the curvature of the eye leading to blurred vision (astigmatism); less often, there can be crossing of the eyes (strabismus) or cataracts at a young age. Rarely, the optic nerves at the back of the eye can appear enlarged (pseudopapilledema).

