Myoclonic Atonic Epilepsy

synonyms:
Doose syndromeepilepsy with myoclonic-astatic seizuresepilepsy with myoclonic-atonic seizures (EMAS)epilepsy with myoclonic-astatic crisismyoclonic astatic epilepsyMAE

overview:
Summary
Myoclonic atonic epilepsy (MAE) is a rare childhood epilepsy syndrome characterized by myoclonic-atonic seizures, which are typically recognized as jerking muscle contractions followed by sudden muscle limpness. While the disorder is characterized by the presence of myoclonic-atonic seizures in particular, individuals often experience other seizure types as well. This earns MAE the classification of a generalized seizure disorder, and it is also considered to be part of the GEFS+ (genetic epilepsy with febrile seizures plus) spectrum. There is believed to be a strong genetic component to the condition, and males are affected at a rate nearly three times higher than females, but no specific gene has ever been identified for MAE. Onset of the disorder typically occurs between the ages of 7 months and 6 years. Many of these children will have normal development until the time that their seizures begin. Diagnosis can include clinical evaluation and EEG (electroencephalogram) readings to detect abnormal brain waves. Results may be normal at the onset of the disorder but patients with continued seizures typically have abnormal EEG findings. Various medications and dietary changes can be prescribed to control the seizure activity. Ketogenic diet therapy is the most helpful therapy in most children. Between 60-80% of MAE patients achieve seizure remission, whether through medical treatment or adherence to dietary regimens, but those whose seizures persist may be at risk for more intractable (hard to control) seizures and intellectual disabilities.
Introduction
Myoclonic atonic epilepsy, or Doose syndrome, as it was first named, was coined in 1970 by Dr. Hermann Doose. The disorder was initially recognized as being a separate entity from generalized tonic-clonic seizures (characterized by a loss of consciousness followed by convulsive muscle contractions) and Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (including tonic, atonic, myoclonic, and atypical absence seizures). Patients with MAE were set apart from these other disorders based on a combination of key differences, including:
– Normal childhood development prior to seizure onset– Age of onset between 2 and 5– Presence of drop attacks, which are associated with myoclonic-atonic seizures and occur as sudden losses of muscle tone that lead to falls– Abnormal EEG (electroencephalogram) readings

symptoms:
MAE is a seizure disorder that begins in early childhood. Nearly all patients have their first seizures before the age of five, with 24% beginning before the child’s first birthday. Most children with MAE have normal development up to the time of diagnosis, though 20% have minor delays that often present with speech difficulties. For most patients, the first seizure is a generalized tonic-clonic seizure. “Tonic” refers to a stiffening stage, wherein the body becomes rigid. This can cause falls and loss of bladder control due to the inability to control muscle function. The tonic period usually lasts for less than thirty seconds before transitioning into the “clonic” phase, which involves the limb jerks and rapid movements that are characteristically associated with epileptic episodes. Throughout the duration of the episode, the child is completely unconscious and unaware of what is occurring, and may not regain consciousness until a few minutes afterwards.
Although generalized tonic-clonic seizures are the most common onset type, approximately 22% of MAE patients present with absence seizures, and up to 9% are shown to have myoclonic-atonic seizures in their first epileptic episode. Children whose seizures begin after the age of four are more likely to experience absence seizures as their presenting type.
A few days or weeks after their initial seizure, patients begin to experience frequent myoclonic jerks or myoclonic-atonic “drop” seizures. The term “myoclonic” describes a sudden convulsion and rapid movement of muscle groups. Myoclonic jerks are brief contractions of the head, shoulders, or arms, and in some children, the entire body, though these still differ from myoclonic seizures. The individual will not be conscious throughout the episode, but because it occurs so rapidly, it may appear as if they are fully aware. The experience can be relatively mild, appearing only as a head nod or unintentional twitch, or can cause movement of the entire body, leading to falls. By contrast, while myoclonic-atonic seizures also have this characteristic increase in muscle stiffness, they are then followed by an atonic period. The atonic phase results in a sudden loss of muscle tone. This causes the child to immediately fall to the ground, and has been often described as “like someone cutting the strings on a marionette puppet”. Myoclonic-atonic seizures are very rare, are a key diagnostic feature of the disorder. They have also been referred to as atonic attacks or “drop attacks”, and never occur in series. Both myoclonic and myoclonic-atonic seizures typically increase in frequency following their onset. At the peak of seizure activity, 48% of families report 10 to 50 seizures per day.
Absence seizures can also be common in children with MAE. These episodes may be difficult to recognize and may appear as if the child is only daydreaming. These seizures can occur multiple times per day and usually last between 15 and 30 seconds. In some children, the only visible indication is a slight head nod motion or facial twitches. The child may have a blank gaze and will not respond to any type of stimulus. However, as soon as the period ends, the child will be fully conscious.
Atypical absence seizures are similar to normal absence episodes, but may have rare attributes that push them out of the typical classification. Many patients will have the blank stare associated with absence seizures but may be partially responsive. There also may be distinct motor behaviors, including involuntary motions, clonic jerking movements or tonic stiffening spells. Oftentimes, the child will have delayed reactions or seem confused, agitated or out of typical character.
The last seizure classification that is commonly associated with MAE is non-convulsive status epilepticus. The term “status epilepticus” is used to describe seizures that persist for an abnormally extended period of time. This can be the result of one epileptic episode lasting far beyond the typical time span, or when several seizures occur in succession. Convulsive status epilepticus shares symptoms with tonic clonic seizures, and is incredibly rare among MAE patients. By contrast, non-convulsive status epilepticus manifests similarly to absence episodes. They are not particularly life-threatening and typically do not result in brain damage, but can be disruptive to the child’s memory and level of functioning. In some children, these periods can persist for hours to days if intervention does not occur. The individual will not be fully aware of their surroundings during these episodes, and some have likened it to a disoriented, dizzy sensation. Throughout this time, the child will be unresponsive and immobile, and may drool or have slurred speech. An inability to swallow during this time can prevent water and medications from being consumed, which can lead to the individual needing to be brought to the hospital. There have also been incidences of “high functioning” non-convulsive status epilepticus, in which the child is capable of some degree of autonomy and action.
Along with these different classified seizures, there are other symptoms that can be experienced by patients with MAE, including:
● Ataxia, which typically presents as unsteady walking or difficulty with coordinated movements. This occurs in over 80% of patients.● Cognitive impairment, ranging from normal cognition to severe impairment and autistic features, depending on seizure activity and prescribed medications.● Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and attention deficit disorder (ADD), which are experienced by 15-20% of patients.● Behavioral disturbances, which have been anecdotally reported to increase in response to changes in medication dosage or administration.

