Myofibrillar Myopathy

overview:
Myofibrillar myopathies are a group of rare genetic neuromuscular disorders that may be diagnosed in childhood but most often appear after 40 years of age. These conditions are highly variable but are characterized by a slowly progressive muscle weakness that can involve skeletal muscle (muscles that function to move bones) and smooth muscle (muscle often associated with organs, such as the digestive tract). Skeletal muscle weakness can be present in the limb muscles close to the center of the body (proximal) as well as the muscle farther from the center of the body (distal). A weakening of the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy) is common and may result in an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia or conduction defects) or congestive heart failure.

symptoms:
Specific signs and symptoms of myofibrillar myopathies vary by subtype, which are defined by the causative gene (see below). However, all involve progressive muscle weakness and characteristic abnormalities in muscle cells (myofibrillar disorganization and protein accumulation). Some people with myofibrillar myopathy have muscle stiffness, aching, cramps or decreased muscle mass (atrophy). Cardiomyopathy is sometimes the first symptom and may present as arrhythmia, conduction defects or congestive heart failure.
Most individuals with myofibrillar myopathy due to desmin mutations (desminopathies) present with slowly progressive muscle weakness. Distal muscle weakness is more common than proximal muscle weakness but symptoms may vary between people in the same family. Difficulty breathing may occur and children with desminopathies may present with cardiomyopathy.
For those with alpha-b crystallinopathy, which is myofibrillar myopathy caused due to mutations in theCRYABgene, symptoms usually occur in adulthood, and include limb muscle weakness that is more severe in the distal muscles than the proximal muscles as well as cardiomyopathy, difficulty breathing and cataracts. If alpha-b crystallinopathy begins in infancy, it can be associated with muscle stiffness and weakness and respiratory failure.
For people with the myotilinopathy subtype, which is caused by mutations in theMYOTgene, symptoms mostly begin in middle or late adulthood. The main symptoms are limb weakness, cardiopathy and difficulty breathing. A small portion of patients have a form that begins in early or middle adulthood. This form involves limb weakness and can result in arrhythmia.
The ZASPopathy subtype, caused by mutations in theZASPgene, usually presents in middle or late adulthood with the features of limb weakness (proximal more affected than distal) and difficulty breathing. Cardiopathy and neuropathy can occur in a small portion of this group.
Most individuals with the filaminopathy subtype, caused by mutations in theFLNCgene, usually experience symptoms in middle adulthood, with features of muscle weakness that is more severe in the proximal limbs than the distal limbs and difficulty breathing. Cardiopathy may occur in a subset of people, and pain, loss of sensation and inability to control muscles may also occur.
Children withBAG3-related myofibrillar myopathies may present before the age of 20 with proximal weakness, respiratory failure and restrictive cardiomyopathy. This condition is frequently rapidly progressive and fatal.

