Myotonic Dystrophy

synonyms:
Curschmann-Batten-Steinert syndromeDMdystrophia myotoniamyotonia atrophicaSteinert diseasemyotonic muscular dystrophyProximal myotonic myopathy (PROMM)Ricker syndrome

overview:
Summary
Myotonic dystrophy refers to two rare genetic disorders of muscle that actually affect multiple systems of the body. The disorder is abbreviated DM, which is for dystrophia myotonia. This is the Latin name for the disorder. There are two main types DM. DM type 1 (DM1) can be further classified as mild DM1, classic DM1 and congenital DM1. Mild DM1 is characterized by clouding of the lenses of the eyes (cataracts) and sustained muscle contractions (myotonia), in which the muscles do not relax after use. Classic DM1 is characterized by muscle weakness and wasting (atrophy), myotonia, early-onset cataracts (i.e. before the age of 50), and abnormalities in the heart’s conduction of electrical impulses. Congenital DM1 is characterized by muscle weakness (hypotonia), difficulty breathing, intellectual disability and early death. DM type 2 (DM2) causes similar symptoms to DM1, but is generally a less severe disorder and does not cause congenital disease. DM1 is caused by an alteration in theDMPKgene. DM2 is caused by an alteration in theCNBPgene. These alterations are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.
Introduction
DM is a type of muscular dystrophy. The muscular dystrophies are characterized by weakness and degeneration of various voluntary muscles of the body. Each disorder is characterized by specific abnormalities (e.g. variation of muscle fiber size, muscle fiber necrosis, scar tissue formation and inflammation) in muscle biopsy from patients. DM1 is also known as Steinert disease, named after Dr. Steinert who, along with colleagues, first described the classic form in the medical literature in 1909. DM2 is also known as Ricker syndrome or proximal myotonic dystrophy or PROMM.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of DM1 or DM2 can vary greatly among affected individuals. This is true even among members of the same family. Many people will not develop all of the symptoms discussed below. Every person is unique and how these disorders affect a person can be very different. In addition, DM1 and DM2 have many symptoms that overlap, but there are also symptoms unique to each disorder, clearly marking them distinct disorders.
DM1 can develop at birth (congenital form), during childhood (juvenile form) and during adulthood (adult form). The adult form is the most common form and usually begins in a person’s 30s. Generally, the signs and symptoms of these disorders progress slowly.
ADULT-ONSET DM1This is the most common form of myotonic dystrophy. People may have mild disease or severe complications. Mild DM1 may be associated with cataract, mild myotonia and sometimes diabetes. Men with the mild form have an increased likelihood of going bald. Affected individuals may have fully active lives with little impact on the lifespan or quality of life.
Individuals with a more severe form of DM1 (commonly referred to as the classic form) have muscle weakness that most often affects certain muscles including a muscle that elevates the upper eyelid, a muscle that helps people to chew (masticate), a muscle that helps to move the neck, the muscles of the forearm closest to the hands, certain muscles in the hands, and muscles of the lower legs that help to move the ankles. Less often, muscles around the eyes (extraocular), a group of muscles located on the front of the thighs (quadriceps) and various muscles of the respiratory tract are affected. Muscle weakness and wasting is progressive. Muscle pain and fatigue are common.
For some people, it may take longer for their muscles to relax after using them (myotonia). This is often described as the muscles stiffening. Myotonia is usually mild or moderate in severity. Two common examples of myotonia are being unable to release a doorknob after opening or shutting a door, or taking a moment to be able to release a person’s hand after shaking hands.
Because of weakness of facial muscles, affected individuals may not have facial expressions or have a mask-like facial appearance. Because of weakness of the muscle that elevates the upper eyelids, the eyelids may droop and hang partially in front of the eyes (ptosis). Some individuals may have slurred speech because of weakness of muscles required to speak.
Many people with DM1 have conduction defects of the heart. This means that there are problems with the transfer of electrical impulses (conduction) that regulate the normal, rhythmic pumping action of the heart. The normal heart has four chambers. The two upper chambers are the atria and the two lower chambers are the ventricles. Within the right atrium of a normal heart is a natural pacemaker that initiates and controls the heartbeat. The electrical stimulus travels from the pacemaker (sinoatrial or SA node) to the ventricles along a very specific path consisting of conducting tissue and known as the AV (atrioventricular) node. If the electrical impulse is transmitted normally, the heart behaves normally. If the transmission of the signal is impeded, the blocked transmission is known as a heart block or an AV block. People with DM1 may have irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias), disease of the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy), overgrowth of the left ventricle (ventricular hypertrophy). The various heart abnormalities potentially associated with DM1 can lead to life-threatening complications.
Weakness of muscles necessary for breathing can occur and can lead to hypoventilation, which is the insufficient exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen in the lungs. People with hypoventilation breathe at a slower rate and there is an increased about of carbon dioxide in the blood. It is possible for respiratory failure to occur, particularly late in life.
Individuals with DM1 can develop problems in the gastrointestinal system. This involves the smooth muscle of the stomach and intestines. Affected individuals may have abdominal pain, gallstones, constipation, diarrhea, loss of bladder control (incontinence), and pseudo-obstruction, which is caused by abnormalities in the involuntary, coordinated muscle contractions (peristalsis) of the gastrointestinal tract. Peristalsis propels food and other material through the digestive system. Because of weakened muscles, peristalsis becomes altered and inefficient. Symptoms of pseudo-obstruction resemble those caused by mechanical obstruction of the small bowel. Mechanical obstruction refers to something (such as a tumor, scar tissue, etc.) physically blocking the passage of food and other material through the GI tract. With pseudo-obstruction, no such physical obstruction is present. Common symptoms include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, abdominal swelling (distention) and constipation.
Some individuals with DM1 have difficulty swallowing (dysphagia). Dysphagia may result in aspiration pneumonia, an infection that develops when food, saliva and bacteria are inhaled into the lungs. This can potentially be a life-threatening complication.
Men who have DM1 have changes in hormones that cause balding. Some men are unable to father a child (infertility) due to underdevelopment of the testes (hypogonadism). People with the classic or adult form of DM are also at a greater risk of developing diabetes. Some individuals have problems with their sleep including sleep apnea, and episodes of drowsiness, tiredness and lack of energy during the day (excessive daytime sleepiness). Some individuals have small, benign growths called pilomatrixomas and epitheliomas, particularly on the scalp. Behavioral issues including obsessive-compulsive disorder and passive-aggressive personality have been reported.
JUVENILE DM1Some medical sources classify certain individuals with DM1 as having juvenile DM1. Onset is often before the age of 12. They may or may not have signs of muscle weakness or myotonia. Affected individuals usually have some intellectual and behavioral issues such as learning disabilities and difficulties with socialization at school. Difficulty with speech (dysarthria), hearing problems, and problems with coordination may also occur. Heart issues including heart rhythm disturbances and irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias) have been reported. Heart issues have occurred in adolescents who did not have any other symptoms.
CONGENITAL DM1This is the most severe form of DM. Infants show signs and symptoms of the disorder at birth (congenital) including severe muscle weakness and hypotonia. Hypotonia is when an infant lacks muscles tone; such infants are described as ‘floppy’. Some infants have muscle weakness affecting both sides of the face (facial diplegia). Clubfoot (talipes equinovarus), in which the foot appears to be turned in toward the body, is also common at birth.
Some infants have a low clarity of vision (visual acuity), farsightedness (hyperopia), and an abnormal curving of the lenses of the eye (astigmatism), which can contribute to poor or blurred vision. Mild to moderate intellectual disability can also occur in infants and children with congenital DM1. Learning and behavioral disabilities may become apparent as children grow older.
Poor feeding is common in affected infants and they often fail to grow and gain weight as expected (failure to thrive). Some infants have gastroparesis, a condition in which there is sluggish emptying of solid food (and more rarely, liquid nutrients) from the stomach. This can result in persistent digestive symptoms, especially nausea.
Infants and children with congenital DM1 may have breathing difficulties due to muscle weakness. Breathing difficulties are often severe and can lead to respiratory failure, which is a common cause of mortality in congenital DM1.
Infants and children with congenital DM1 who survive early, severe complications will go on and develop symptoms of adult onset DM1 including heart (cardiac) abnormalities. Cardiac issues can begin as early as the second decade of life. In rare instances, severely affected infants can have cardiac abnormalities in the newborn (neonatal) period.
MYOTONIC DYSTROPHY TYPE 2 (DM2)The onset of DM2 is typically in the third decade, but anywhere between the second and sixth decade of life is common. The signs and symptoms are highly variable. The most common symptoms are muscle weakness and pain, myotonia, and cataracts. However, some people will not develop these symptoms. Sometimes, the severity of these symptoms change in a person. For example, myotonia may worsen or improve. Symptoms do not appear in the congenital or juvenile ages.
The muscles of the neck and fingers are often the first muscles affected in DM2. Muscle weakness slowly affects other muscles including muscles of the elbows and hips. About one-third of affected individuals develop muscle weakness in the hips after the age of 50. Less commonly affected are facial muscles and muscles of the ankles. The muscles of the thighs are commonly affected and some people may have stiffness and weakness of these muscles when running up stairs. Muscle pain may come and go and can fluctuate in severity. Sometimes, muscle pain can be debilitating. Fatigue is common.
In addition to muscle weakness and pain, it may also take longer for the muscles to relax after using them (myotonia). This is often described as the muscles stiffening. Although uncommon, myotonia has been reported to occur as early as the first decade of life. Some individuals with DM2 will not develop myotonia.
Cataracts are common and can develop as early as the second decade of life. Affected individuals are at a greater risk than the general population of developing diabetes. Some affected men may be unable to father a child (infertility). Excessive sweating and difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) are also common in DM2. Some people may have problems with concentration, organization and finding the right word when writing or speaking (word finding).
Heart (cardiac) abnormalities are less severe in DM2 than in DM1, and they occur with less frequency as well. Conduction defects, irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias), and disease of the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy) are potential complications. Sudden death because of heart abnormalities is possible in some people, but is a rare occurrence.

