Myotonia Congenita

overview:
Myotonia congenita is a rare genetic disorder in which an abnormality of voluntary (skeletal) muscle fiber membranes causes an unusually exaggerated response to stimulation (hyperexcitability). As a result, affected individuals have difficulty relaxing certain muscles after contracting them (myotonia), muscle stiffness (rigidity), and associated symptoms. Such symptoms tend to occur when attempting to move certain muscles after rest. In many cases, individuals with myotonia congenita also have abnormal enlargement of the muscles (hypertrophy), resulting in a “herculean” or “body-builder like” appearance.
Two main forms of myotonia congenita have been described: Thomsen disease and Becker disease. In individuals with Thomsen disease, symptoms and findings such as myotonia, associated muscle rigidity, and abnormal muscle enlargement may become apparent from infancy to approximately two to three years of age. In many cases, muscles of the eyelids, hands, and legs may be most affected. Thomsen disease is transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait.
In those with Becker disease, symptoms most commonly become apparent between the ages of four and 12 years. As in Thomsen type myotonia congenita, affected individuals develop myotonia, associated muscle rigidity, and abnormal muscle enlargement (hypertrophy). The symptoms tend to remain constant, with little progression. Becker disease is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.

symptoms:
Myotonia congenita is a disorder of voluntary (skeletal) muscle characterized by an exaggerated response to stimulation of certain muscle fibers (hyperexcitability). As a result, there is painless spasm (tonic spasm) of affected muscle after forceful voluntary contraction, abnormal muscle stiffness, and difficulty relaxing muscle (myotonia). Such symptoms tend to occur when affected individuals attempt to move certain muscles following a period of inactivity or when affected muscles are mechanically stimulated. Characteristic symptoms may include difficulties relaxing hand grip; completely opening the eyes after forcibly closing them (e.g., following crying or sneezing); arising from a chair; starting to walk or run; climbing stairs; and/or arising from bed at night. As noted above, the myotonia is characteristically most pronounced following a period of rest. In addition, it typically improves by gradually increasing the force or intensity of movements through “warming up.” Most individuals with myotonia congenita also develop abnormal enlargement of voluntary muscles (hypertrophy), resulting in an athletic appearance.
As noted above, two major forms of myotonia congenita have been described: Thomsen disease (autosomal dominant type) and Becker disease (autosomal recessive type). (For more information on mode of inheritance, please see the “Causes” section of this report below.)
In Thomsen type myotonia congenita, symptoms may become evident from infancy to approximately two to three years of age and are typically nonprogressive. However, the severity of the myotonia may vary greatly among members of the same family, with males typically more severely affected. According to some reports, exposure to cold temperatures may aggravate symptoms in some cases.
In many individuals with Thomsen disease, muscles of the legs, hands, and/or eyelids are most affected, particularly those of the legs. Characteristic symptoms may include those mentioned above (e.g., difficulties starting to walk or run, arising from a bed or chair, relaxing the hand grip, etc.). In addition, some may experience spasms of other muscles, including certain muscles of the face, trunk, or other regions. For example, involvement of muscles that control movements of the eyeballs (extraocular muscles) may lead to temporary episodes of double vision or abnormal deviation of one eye in relation to the other (strabismus). In addition, in some cases, if myotonia affects muscles of the throat, affected individuals may have difficulties with chewing, swallowing, and/or attempting to talk after a long period of silence.
As mentioned above, individuals with Thomsen disease may develop abnormal enlargement (hypertrophy) of the muscles. Affected individuals typically have normal muscle strength or only minimal muscle weakness.
In individuals with Becker type myotonia congenita, symptoms tend to become apparent between the ages of four to 12 years. However, in some rare cases, onset may occur as late as approximately 18 years of age. Associated symptoms are similar to those of Thomsen disease; however, they tend to progress over many years and to be more severe.
In most cases of Becker disease, the myotonia is initially apparent in muscles of the legs. With disease progression, muscles of the arms, trunk, and face are eventually affected. Enhancement of symptoms by cold exposure appears to be less common than seen with Thomsen disease.
Abnormal muscle enlargement (hypertrophy) is typically present in individuals with Becker disease and may be particularly striking, resulting in an even more pronounced “body-builder like” appearance. In addition, in contrast to Thomsen type myotonia congenita, muscle weakness and muscle wasting (atrophy) may also be present.
According to the medical literature, two sisters with Becker type myotonia congenita demonstrated susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia (MH). MH is a potentially life-threatening condition that may be triggered due to exposure to certain general anesthetics (e.g., halothane) or skeletal muscle relaxants (e.g., succinylcholine) that may be administered during surgical procedures. Such a reaction may be characterized by a dangerous, sudden rise in body temperature (hyperthermia); stiffness of skeletal muscles; low blood pressure (hypotension); an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmias); and/or other complications, requiring immediate emergency intervention. In the two sisters described, exposure to succinylcholine resulted in generalized muscle rigidity without a rise in body temperature. According to researchers, it is unclear whether this was an incidental finding or whether MH or an MH-like condition may be associated with Becker disease in some cases. Therefore, the implications of this finding are not yet fully understood.

