N-Acetylglutamate Synthetase Deficiency

synonyms:
hyperammonemia due to N-acetylglutamate synthetase deficiencyNAGS deficiency

overview:


symptoms:
NAGS deficiency may be associated with complete or partial absence of the NAGS enzyme. Complete lack of the NAGS enzyme results in the severe form of the disorder, in which symptoms occur shortly after birth (neonatal period). Partial lack of the NAGS enzyme results in a milder form of the disorder that occurs later during infancy or childhood or even adulthood in some cases. Specific symptoms can vary from one person to another.
The symptoms of NAGS deficiency are caused by the accumulation of ammonia in the blood. In the most severe cases, the symptoms of NAGS deficiency occur within 24-72 hours after birth. Affected infants may exhibit refusal to eat and poor feeding habits, progressive lethargy, recurrent vomiting, diarrhea, irritability and an abnormally enlarged liver (hepatomegaly). More severe complications can also develop including seizures, confusion, respiratory distress, and the abnormal accumulation of fluid in the brain (cerebral edema).
In some cases, the symptoms of NAGS deficiency may progress to coma due to high levels of ammonia in the blood (hyperammonemic coma). In such cases, the disorder may potentially result in neurological abnormalities including developmental delays, learning disabilities and intellectual disability. The severity of such neurological abnormalities is greater in infants who are in hyperammonemic coma for more than three days. If left untreated, the disorder will result in life-threatening complications.
Some individuals with NAGS deficiency may not exhibit symptoms until later during infancy or childhood or even adulthood because of a partial deficiency of the NAGS enzyme. Symptoms may include failure to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive), poor growth, avoidance of protein from the diet, inability to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia), lethargy, vomiting, and/or diminished muscle tone (hypotonia). Infants and children with the mild form of NAGS deficiency can still experience hyperammonemic coma and life-threatening complications.

