Nager Syndrome

synonyms:
acrofacial dysostosis, Nager Typemandibulofacial dysostosis, Treacher Collins type, with limb anomaliesNager acrofacial dysostosisNAFDpreaxial acrofacial dysostosis

overview:
Summary

Nager syndrome is a rare inherited disorder characterized by craniofacial malformations occurring in association with abnormalities of the thumb and forearm. Craniofacial malformations include underdevelopment of the cheekbones (malar hypoplasia) resulting in downward slanting palpebral fissures; incomplete development of the lower jaw (mandibular hypoplasia), causing the jaw to appear abnormally small (micrognathia); and small (microtia) and/or malformed (dysplastic) external ears (pinnae), often with a blind ending or absent external ear canals, resulting in hearing impairment (conductive hearing loss). Nager syndrome is distinguished from other forms of acrofacial dysostosis by the limb abnormalities, which are primarily on the thumb (radial) side of the hand and forearm including underdevelopment or absence of the thumbs and the radius bone in the forearm, and abnormal fusion of bones in the forearms (radioulnar synostosis). The fingers and the feet are usually normal. Intelligence is usually not affected. Nager syndrome is typically inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern and is caused by changes (mutations) in the SF3B4 gene. Although an individual with Nager syndrome can transmit the condition to his/her children, many cases occur randomly (sporadic) as a new gene change (de novo mutation) in the family.

Introduction

Nager syndrome was first described in the medical literature in 1948 by doctors Nager and De Reynier. Nager syndrome belongs to a group of disorders collectively known as acrofacial dysostoses or AFDs. These disorders are characterized by craniofacial and limb abnormalities. AFDs are generally broken down into preaxial and postaxial types. Nager syndrome is a preaxial form; the term preaxial refers to the bones of the arms and legs that are on the thumb and big toe sides of the body.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms that occur may vary from one person to another, even among members of the same family. Affected individuals may develop a variety of craniofacial and limb abnormalities which usually are noticeable at birth (congenital).
Common craniofacial abnormalities include underdevelopment of the cheekbones (malar hypoplasia); an abnormally small lower jaw (micrognathia); incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate) and/or velopharyngeal insufficiency, in which the soft palate of the mouth does not close properly during speech; narrowing of the back of the nasal cavity (choanal atresia); malformation of the internal or external ears that can range from mild abnormality to absence of the external portion of the ear. Additional craniofacial findings in or around the eyes include downward-slanting palpebral fissures (which means that opening between the upper and lower lids slants downward), absence of tissue (colobomas) from the lower eyelids, partial or total absence of the eyelashes of the lower eyelids, and droopy or sagging of the upper eyelids (ptosis). In some patients, scalp hair may extend onto the cheek.
Micrognathia is caused by underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the lower jaw bone (mandible). Severe mandibular hypoplasia along with cleft palate and choanal atresia can result in feeding difficulties and/or severe breathing difficulties during infancy. In some cases, if left untreated, breathing difficulties can cause life-threatening complications. Affected individuals may have temporomandibular joint dysfunction (TMJD); the temporomandibular joint connects the jaws to the side of the head. TMJD can cause pain of the jaw, face and neck, stiff jaw muscles, and upper and lower teeth that do not meet properly when closing the mouth (malocclusion).
Malformation of the ears can contribute to affected individuals developing conductive hearing loss. Conductive hearing loss occurs due to lack of conduction of sound from the outer or middle ear to the inner ear. Degree of hearing loss can vary. Hearing impairment may cause speech development to be delayed.
Individuals with Nager syndrome also have abnormalities affecting the arms and hands including underdevelopment or absence of the thumbs, the presence of an extra (third) copy of a bone known as the phalange within the thumb (triphalangeal thumbs), and underdevelopment of the forearm bone on the thumb side of the arm (radius). Less often, webbing (syndactyly) of the fingers may occur, or certain fingers may be fixed or stuck in a bent position (camptodactyly). The formation of an abnormal bone or soft tissue connection between the ulna and the radius, two main bones of the forearm (radioulnar synostosis) may also occur. Because of these abnormalities, the forearms may appear abnormally short. Some individuals may have difficulty fully straightening their arms because the range of motion of the elbow is limited. A few very severely affected individuals have severely shortened upper limbs (phocomelia).
Although abnormalities of the hands and forearms are more common, some affected individuals have abnormalities affecting the feet and lower legs including underdeveloped or absent toes, webbing of the toes, clubfeet, and the abnormal turning inward of the big toe towards the index toe (hallux valgus).
While most individuals with Nager syndrome are healthy, a few severely affected individuals have serious internal malformations involving the kidney and/or the heart. Additional rare symptoms that have been reported in the medical literature include diaphragmatic hernia (an abnormal connection between the chest and abdomen), and underdevelopment of the larynx which can contribute to respiratory problems, as well as additional skeletal abnormalities such as underdevelopment of the first rib, abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis), or dislocation of the hip.

