Nance-Horan Syndrome

synonyms:
cataract-dental syndromecataract, X-linked, with Hutchinsonian teethMesiodens-cataract syndromeNHS

overview:
Nance-Horan syndrome is a rare genetic disorder that may be evident at birth (congenital). It is primarily characterized by abnormalities of the teeth and clouding of the lens of the eyes (congenital cataracts), resulting in poor vision. Additional eye (ocular) abnormalities are also often present, such as unusual smallness of the front, clear portion of the eye through which light passes (microcornea) and involuntary, rapid, rhythmic eye movements (nystagmus). In some affected individuals, the disorder may also be associated with additional physical abnormalities and/or intellectual impairment. The range and severity of symptoms may vary greatly from one person to another, including among affected members of the same family.
Nance-Horan syndrome is inherited as an X-linked trait that it is usually fully expressed in males only. However, females who carry a single copy of the disease gene (heterozygotes) may manifest some of the symptoms and findings associated with the disorder. These may include microcornea and/or clouding of the lens of the eyes (posterior sutural cataract). Symptoms are less severe than those of affected males, potentially causing only slightly decreased clearness or clarity of vision (visual acuity). In some patients, abnormalities of the teeth may also be present. Intellectual impairment rarely occurs in females.

symptoms:
In affected males, the primary physical characteristic associated with Nance-Horan syndrome is the presence of dense clouding (opacities) of the lens of both eyes at birth (congenital bilateral nuclear cataracts).The lens of an eye is the small transparent flattened and elongated ball located behind the iris through which light passes. The light focuses on the retina, the thin nerve-rich membrane that lining the back of the eye. The retina converts the light into nerve impulses and relays the information along the optic nerve to the brain. Cataracts affect both eyes (bilateral) and usually result in blurred vision and severely decreased clearness or clarity of vision (visual acuity). Vision loss can potentially be profound.
Males with Nance-Horan syndrome may have additional eye abnormalities. The front (anterior), clear portion of the eye through which light passes (cornea) may be unusually small (microcornea). In addition, affected males with poor vision may have recurrent, involuntary, “to-and-fro” movements of the eyes (pendular nystagmus) and/or misalignment of the eyes (strabismus). In some cases, the entire eye may be abnormally small (microphthalmia) and/or the upper eyelid may droop (ptosis).
Males with Nance-Horan syndrome may also have several dental abnormalities such as unusually shaped, extra (supernumerary) teeth, absence of some teeth (dental agenesis), impacted teeth or unusually wide spaces (diastema) between some of the teeth. Front teeth (incisors) are tapered and “screwdriver-shaped” or are similar in appearance to a tooth abnormality often associated with congenital syphilis (i.e., Hutchinson’s teeth). Posterior teeth may be conical, rounded, cylindrical or with extra cusps (small bumps at the surface of the molar teeth). Some affected males may have an extra (supernumerary), centrally located front tooth in the upper jaw (mesiodens). The tooth may be “cone-shaped” with an abnormally short root. Such supernumerary incisors may prevent or disrupt the normal eruption of permanent incisors in some cases. Both the baby (deciduous) and permanent teeth are involved.
In many males with Nance-Horan syndrome, other physical findings may also occur. Distinctive facial features may be present, but may be subtle. The ears may be flared forward (anteverted) and unusually prominent, with folded lobes. Affected males may have a large, prominent nose with a high, narrow nasal bridge; a narrow prominent jaw (prognathism); and a long sometimes narrow face.
Some males with Nance-Horan syndrome may also experience delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of muscular and mental activity (psychomotor retardation). In addition, some reports suggest that approximately 20 to 30 percent of affected males may have varying levels of intellectual dysfunction. Intellectual dysfunction is usually mild or moderate, but in some cases can be severe. Autism spectrum disorder symptoms have also been observed in a few patients.
As mentioned above, females who carry a single copy of the disease gene for Nance-Horan syndrome (heterozygotes) may develop some symptoms of the disorder. Such symptoms are usually milder and more variable than those associated with the fully expressed disorder. Affected females may have abnormally small corneas (microcornea) and/or Y-shaped clouding (opacities) in the back portion of the lens of the eyes at birth (congenital posterior sutural cataracts). Vision may be normal, or there may be slightly decreased clearness or clarity of vision (visual acuity). Without appropriate treatment, posterior sutural cataracts may progress to total clouding of the lens of the eyes (total cataracts) later in life. Heterozygous females often have some dental abnormalities, such as abnormally-shaped front teeth (incisors) and/or unusually wide spaces (irregular diastema) between some of the teeth. Affected females usually do not develop intellectual impairment.

