Narcolepsy

synonyms:
Gelineau's syndromehypnolepsynarcoleptic syndromeparoxysmal sleep

overview:
Summary
Narcolepsy is a neurological sleep disorder characterized by chronic, excessive attacks of drowsiness during the day, sometimes called excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS). Attacks of drowsiness may persist for only a few seconds or several minutes. These episodes vary in frequency from a few incidents to several during a single day. Nighttime (nocturnal) sleep patterns may also be disrupted. Three additional symptoms often associated with narcolepsy are sudden extreme muscle weakness (cataplexy), a specific type of hallucination that occurs just before falling asleep or upon awakening, and brief episodes of paralysis while waking up. Narcolepsy also may be associated with “automatic behavior”, i.e. doing something automatically without any memory afterward. The incidence of narcolepsy is approximately 1 in 2,000 and most researchers believe that the disorder remains undiagnosed or misdiagnosed in many affected individuals. There is increasing evidence that narcolepsy is an autoimmune disorder. Autoimmune disorders are caused when the body’s immune system mistakenly attacks healthy tissue or cells. In narcolepsy, the immune system destroys certain brain cells that produce a peptide called hypocretin. Hypocretin impacts on many brain functions, but the details of its actions are not yet understood. Why the immune system attacks healthy cells in narcolepsy is unknown and additional environmental and genetic factors may play a role in the development of the disorder.

symptoms:
The development and severity of symptoms associated with narcolepsy vary greatly from one person to another. The onset of symptoms initially occurs one at a time; appearance of new symptoms may be separated by years, with sleepiness generally preceding cataplexy. Narcolepsy usually begins in an adolescent whose initial symptoms are mild but worsen with age. Sometimes symptoms do not change for months, while at other times symptoms may change very quickly. Depending upon the severity of the disorder, narcolepsy can dramatically affect a person’s daily routine, disrupting all aspects of a person’s life.
Excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) is usually the first symptom of narcolepsy. People with narcolepsy typically experience periods of drowsiness, tiredness, lack of energy, an irresistible urge to sleep (“sleep attack”), and/or an inability to resist sleep. This susceptibility to unending drowsiness and/or falling asleep may occur every day but the severity varies from day to day and throughout each day. These episodes are more likely to occur during monotonous, boring activities such as watching television. However, the episodes can occur at any time even when a person is walking, talking, eating or driving a car. Consequently, narcolepsy can profoundly disrupt a person’s life. Affected individuals may fall asleep for brief periods ranging from a few seconds to several minutes. A characteristic finding of narcolepsy is that affected individuals often feel dramatically more awake and alert following short naps.
Narcolepsy can also disrupt nighttime sleeping patterns. Affected individuals may frequently awaken during the night and may be wide awake for significant periods during the night. Despite disrupted sleep patterns, the total sleep time for people with narcolepsy in every 24 hour period is generally normal because they sleep repeatedly for short periods during the day and night.
Many individuals with narcolepsy experience weakness and the sudden loss of voluntary muscle tone (cataplexy). This often occurs during times of intense emotions such as laughter, anger, elation, and/or surprise. Episodes of cataplexy may occur as short periods of partial muscle weakness and can vary in duration and severity. In some cases, a cataplectic attack may be barely noticeable. Affected individuals may experience very brief, mild episodes that may cause the knees to buckle, the jaws to sage, the eyelids to droop or the head to drop. Occasionally in severe cases, there may be an almost complete loss of muscle control that lasts for several minutes. During a severe cataplectic attack, speech and movement may become difficult or impossible although there is no loss of consciousness. Cataplexy may improve as affected individuals grow older.
Some people with narcolepsy do not have cataplexy, and cataplexy is not necessary for a diagnosis of narcolepsy. Cataplexy usually develops approximately several weeks to months after the development of excessive daytime sleepiness. In rare cases, cataplexy may precede the development of difficulties in maintaining alertness.
Some individuals with narcolepsy may experience hallucinations that may occur at the beginning or at the end of a sleep period. These are often vivid and frightening. Examples of hallucinations may include hearing a phone ring or a person walking nearby, seeing people or animals that aren’t there, or having an out of body experience. When the hallucinations occur upon awakening, they are called hypnopompic hallucinations; when they occur when falling asleep, they are called hypnagogic hallucinations. Hallucinations often occur in conjunction with sleep paralysis.
People with narcolepsy may experience temporary “sleep paralysis”. They may be briefly unable to move their limbs or heads or speak. Episodes of sleep paralysis are very short and typically coincide with falling asleep or waking up. Affected individuals regain all movements after these brief episodes.
Some affected individuals may also experience additional symptoms including fatigue, depression, difficulty concentrating, and memory problems. Periodic leg movements and sleep apnea have also been reported in individuals with narcolepsy.

