Necrotizing Fasciitis

synonyms:
flesh-eating bacteriaflesh-eating diseasestreptococcal gangrenesuppurative fasciitis

overview:
Necrotizing fasciitis (NF) is a rare infection that means “decaying infection of the fascia,” which is the soft tissue that is part of the connective tissue system that runs throughout the body. NF is caused by one or more bacteria that attacks the skin, the tissue just beneath the skin (subcutaneous tissue) and the fascia causing these tissues to die (necrosis). These infections can be sudden, vicious, and fast spreading. If not treated quickly with antibiotics and/or debridement of the infected tissue, the patient may develop toxic shock syndrome or toxic shock-like syndrome, which may lead to multiple organ failure and death.

symptoms:
Early symptoms of NF are often mistaken for the flu or local skin irritation. They include high fever, sore throat, stomachache, nausea, diarrhea, chills and general body aches. Around the same time, patients may notice redness (erythema) and pain or tenderness around the red area. The red area often occurs at the infection point, which may include surgical sites, a cut, scratch, bruise, boil, pimple, site of medication or drug injection or any small injury that could have occurred during daily life. The affected area may also spread from the infection point quickly, sometimes spreading at a rate as fast as an inch an hour.
If NF progresses to show advanced symptoms, the patient will continue to have a very high fever (over 102 degrees Fahrenheit) or may become hypothermic (low temperature) and become dehydrated. The pain in the infected area becomes constant and piercing, often extending beyond the area that is red. The pain can be much more severe than expected based on the original injury. The infected area may appear bright red, shiny, swollen and very hot to the touch. As the infection progresses, the affected area will continue to swell, become purple or mottled (blotches of black, purple, and red) and may be accompanied by a rash of blisters and this is a sign of skin necrosis. The affected area may become hard due to the swelling/inflammation caused by the infection (induration). Although the pain becomes excruciating over the initial 24-48 hours, a very late sign of infection is sudden improvement in pain or lack of sensation in the affected area. This may occur as the nerves in the area begin to die and often occurs at the same time that the skin starts to turn purple/black. The patient may have extremely low blood pressure (hypotension) and a faint, rapid heartbeat (tachycardia), which results in dizziness, weakness and confusion.
If NF progresses to show critical symptoms, the patient’s confusion and weakness will become pronounced and the patient may become delirious. They may repeatedly lose bowel/bladder control or consciousness and the infected area will swell to several times the normal size. On occasion, the swollen area may split open and release large amounts of thin, cloudy drainage fluid, although this is not common. Large blisters (bullae) filled with a bloody or yellowish fluid and blackened necrotic lesions appear, causing the skin to break open. The pain slowly subsides as nerves are destroyed, causing a lack of sensation (anesthesia). Urine output ceases (anuria), blood pressure drops severely, heart rate continues to be rapid and breathing becomes rapid and shallow (tachypnea). Eventually, the patient’s vital organs (kidneys, liver, lungs, etc.) shut down due to toxic shock. The skin and other tissues continue to blacken as they die and may shed from the body. Death is imminent.

