Nemaline Myopathy

synonyms:
Congenital Rod DiseaseNMRod Myopathy

overview:
Summary
Nemaline myopathy is a rare genetic muscle disorder. Six different clinical subtypes of nemaline myopathy have been identified based on disease severity and age of onset, ranging from a severe congenital-onset (at birth) form that is usually lethal in the first few months of life, through to less severe forms with onset in childhood or adulthood. Most affected individuals have a milder form of the disorder known as typical congenital nemaline myopathy and are able to walk and lead active lives. The inheritance pattern is variable depending on the underlying genetic cause. Characteristic symptoms of all forms of nemaline myopathy include muscle weakness, diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), and reduced or absent reflexes. In most people, muscle weakness is static (nonprogressive) over time. Weakness of the muscles of breathing and swallowing are the major cause of morbidity and mortality.
Introduction
Nemaline myopathy is defined by muscle weakness and the presence of fine, thread-like or rod-like structures called “nemaline bodies”, when muscle biopsies are viewed under the microscope.  The prefix “nema-” is derived from Greek and means “thread-like.” Nemaline bodies consist of accumulations of muscle proteins due to mutations in genes which encode proteins components of the muscle thin filament.

symptoms:
The age of onset and severity of symptoms and signs associated with nemaline myopathy vary greatly from patient to patient. Some patients with nemaline myopathy present at or shortly after birth (congenital onset). Less often, the disorder may develop during childhood or even more uncommonly in adulthood.
The major clinical features of nemaline myopathy are muscle weakness, hypotonia and reduced or absent reflexes. Muscle weakness is usually most severe in muscles of the face, neck and proximal muscles. The proximal muscles are the muscles that are closest to the center of the body such as the muscles of the shoulder, pelvis, and upper arms and legs.
Because facial muscles are involved, affected individuals may develop distinctive facial features including an elongated face, a displaced jaw that is farther back than normal (retrognathia), and a highly-arched roof of the mouth (palate). Muscle weakness may also cause difficulty speaking (dysarthria) and swallowing resulting in feeding difficulties. Some infants with nemaline myopathy may require a feeding tube. Breathing (respiratory) difficulties may also occur because of muscle weakness.
Affected infants often experience delays in attaining motor milestones such as head control, sitting up or standing. Most infants do not have other developmental issues and intelligence is usually unaffected.
As affected individuals age they may develop abnormally fixed joints that occur when thickening and shortening of tissue such as muscle fibers cause deformity and restrict the movement of an affected area (contractures), a sunken chest (pectus excavatum), abnormal side-to-side-curvature of the spine (scoliosis) or abnormal rigidity of the spine.
Six different clinical presentations of nemaline myopathy have been identified.
Typical Congenital Nemaline MyopathyThis is the most common form of nemaline myopathy accounting for approximately half of all cases. This form is present at or shortly after birth or sometime during the first year of life. Affected infants may exhibit muscle weakness, hypotonia leading to abnormal “floppiness”, and feeding difficulties. Muscle weakness is less severe in the typical congenital form than in the severe congenital or intermediate congenital forms. Some infants with this form may have significant muscle weakness at birth that improves with age.
Weakness of respiratory muscles is common and may cause breathing difficulties, and nocturnal hypoventilation, a condition in which inadequate breathing during sleep results in increased levels of carbon dioxide in the blood (hypercarbia). Some infants may have an abnormal waddling walk (gait), swallowing difficulties (dysphagia), speech difficulties (dysarthria), and a nasal tone to the voice. Affected infants may also experience delays attaining gross motor milestones such as holding one’s head up, sitting or standing. In rare cases, delayed attainment of motor milestones may be the first sign of the disorder.
Muscle weakness in infants with the typical congenital form of nemaline myopathy usually affects the proximal muscles, but, in rare cases, may spread to affect the distal muscles, which are the muscles farther from the center of the body and include the muscles of the lower arms and legs and the hands and feet. The muscle weakness associated with the typical form does not usually progress. However, during growth spurts associated with puberty, some individuals have experienced progressive worsening of muscle weakness that ultimately may require the use of a wheelchair. Most individuals who have typical congenital nemaline myopathy are eventually able to walk independently.
Severe Congenital (Neonatal) Nemaline MyopathyThis form of nemaline myopathy is apparent at birth and accounts for approximately 16 percent of cases. Affected infants have profound muscle weakness and severe hypotonia. Infants with this form of nemaline myopathy experience difficulty sucking and swallowing leading to feeding difficulties, show little spontaneous movement, and exhibit respiratory insufficiency. Some infants may experience the passage or backflow (reflux) of the contents of the stomach or small intestines into the esophagus (gastroesophageal reflux).
In rare cases, this form of nemaline myopathy has been associated with disease of the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy) and the presence of multiple contractures (arthrogryposis multiplex congenita). Fractures may also occur. The severe involvement of respiratory muscles often leads to life-threatening respiratory failure and weakness of the bulbar (swallowing) muscles increases the risk of aspiration pneumonia (in which liquid or food is inhaled into the lungs).
Intermediate Congenital Nemaline MyopathyThis form of nemaline myopathy is less severe than the severe congenital form and more severe than the typical congenital form. It accounts for approximately 20 percent of cases. The early development of contractures is characteristic of this form of nemaline myopathy. As affected infants age, they often experience delays in attaining motor milestones or may not be able to sit up or walk independently. Children with intermediate congenital nemaline myopathy often require a wheelchair or ongoing breathing (ventilatory) support during childhhood.
Childhood-Onset Nemaline MyopathyThis form of nemaline myopathy usually becomes apparent between 10-20 years of age and accounts for approximately 13 percent of cases. The development of early motor skills is usually unaffected. Sometime during the late teens or early twenties, affected individuals develop slowly progressive muscle weakness. Affected individuals may be unable to bend the foot upward toward the leg (foot drop). Eventually the entire ankle and lower legs muscles are involved. In one family with this form of nemaline myopathy, two members required wheelchairs by age 40.
Adult-Onset Nemaline MyopathyThe onset and severity of this form of nemaline myopathy varies. It is extremely rare accounting for only 4 percent of cases. It occurs in individuals between the ages of 20-50 who develop generalized muscle weakness that may progress rapidly. Muscle pain (myalgia) may also occur. Involvement of certain neck muscles may make it difficult to hold one’s head up and cause the head to drop.
Although uncommon, some individuals may develop respiratory or cardiac complications often in conjunction with increasing muscle weakness. This form of nemaline myopathy may be distinct form the genetic or inherited forms of the disorder.
Amish Nemaline MyopathyThis form of myopathy was identified in several related families within an Amish community. Onset is shortly after birth and affected infants may have hypotonia, multiple contractures, and tremors, which usually diminish over the first few months of life. Affected infants have progressive muscle weakness, a severely deformed chest with a prominent sternum (pectus carinatum), muscle wasting (atrophy) and life-threatening respiratory insufficiency.Severe neonatal respiratory disease and the presence of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (joint contractures, which are permanent shortening of a muscle) often lead to death in the second year of life.

