Neonatal-Onset Multisystem Inflammatory Disease

synonyms:
chronic, infantile, neurological, cutaneous and articular syndromeCINCA syndromeNOMID

overview:
Summary

Neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disease (NOMID), also known as chronic infantile neurologic cutaneous articular (CINCA) syndrome, is a rare, systemic, inflammatory condition characterized by fever, rash, joint symptoms, and central nervous system (CNS) symptoms. The hallmark of NOMID is onset during early infancy, usually before six months of age. The severity of NOMID varies from child to child. Early diagnosis and prompt treatment with specific medications is important for preventing severe complications of the disease and improving life expectancy.

Introduction

NOMID is the least common and most severe form of the cryopyrin associated periodic syndromes (CAPS) caused by mutations in theCIAS1/NLRP3gene. All of these syndromes are characterized by fever, rash, and musculoskeletal pain.

symptoms:
In addition to fever, symptoms of NOMID involve the skin, CNS and joints. Skin rashes occur in all patients within the first six weeks of life and persist throughout their lives. CNS symptoms include inflammation around the brain (chronic aseptic meningitis), cognitive/mental deficits/learning disabilities, and seizures and sensory organ dysfunction, which can result in vision and hearing loss. Joint inflammation and joint and bone deformities range in severity. Enlargement of the bones around the knee is also characteristic of NOMID.
Other clinical features include stunted growth, enlargement of the liver and spleen, an abnormal increase in the number of white blood cells, an elevation in blood levels of the protein amyloid A, C-reactive protein, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (blood tests used to measure elevations of these markers can detect or grade inflammation). In addition, abnormal facial features, narrowed smaller teeth and other dental abnormalities can sometimes be seen.
NOMID shares symptoms, and should not be confused, with juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA). High recurrent fevers, joint pain, deforming joint disease and rash are symptoms of both NOMID and JIA. However, NOMID is differentiated by the onset of skin disease at birth and a persistent rash. In addition, many patients with NOMID have nonspecific joint pain and enlargement of the knees, while patients with JIA present with inflamed synovial joints, such as the shoulder or knee, increased production of fluid in the synovial joints and warm, swollen, stiff joints.
NOMID patients suffer from frequent, almost daily flare-up episodes which cause great discomfort, can be very debilitating, and may require medical assistance during the episodes. Some patients are unable to walk or bear weight on their legs due to joint damage and/or pain. Many children with NOMID have cognitive and mental deficits and/or learning disabilities as well as vision and hearing loss.

