Neonatal Cholestasis

synonyms:
idiopathic neonatal hepatitisneonatal giant cell hepatitisintrahepatic cholestasis

overview:
Neonatal cholestasis refers to impaired flow of bile at any point from the liver cells into the intestine of a newborn.
Neonatal cholestasis may be caused by viruses, metabolic disease or genetic disorders, as well as other rare diseases that affect or impair the function of the liver. In a small percent of patients, the cause of liver injury is unknown – these cases are referred to as idiopathic neonatal hepatitis (INH). The incidence of neonatal cholestasis is estimated to be ~1:2500 live births worldwide, and 25% to 50% are now known to be associated with changes (variants or mutations) in specific genes.
The symptoms of neonatal cholestasis may vary from one individual to another. Symptoms of liver disease include yellowing of the whites of the eyes and the skin (jaundice), enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly), unusually dark urine and poor growth. Some individuals with neonatal cholestasis fully recover from the condition (sporadic or transient forms); however, some will progress to chronic liver disease (persistent or progressive forms).

symptoms:
The liver is located on the right side of the abdominal cavity just under the rib cage. The liver has many different functions including filtering harmful substances (toxins, including bilirubin) out of the bloodstream, synthesizing proteins, storing essential vitamins, helping to breakdown (metabolize) food to use as energy, creating components that help the blood form clots in response to injury and producing bile, a liquid that plays an essential role in breaking down fats in the small intestine.
Neonatal cholestasis can range from a mild, temporary (transient) disease that improves without treatment to more serious forms that cause additional complications. The common symptoms of liver disease may appear anytime during the first few weeks of life. By the age of 2 to 3 months, it becomes clear that an infant with neonatal cholestasis is not gaining weight and is growing at a slower than normal rate (failure to thrive). The infant may be irritable because of excessively itchy skin (pruritus). Other symptoms may include enlargement of the spleen (splenomegaly).
In more serious forms of neonatal cholestasis additional symptoms can occur including easy bruising, prolonged bleeding, infection (sepsis) and/or the accumulation of body fluids within the abdomen (ascites) in the later stages of chronic liver injury. Liver (hepatic) failure may eventually develop in some individuals with severe forms of neonatal cholestasis.

