Neonatal Hemochromatosis

synonyms:
congenital hemochromatosisneonatal iron storage disease

overview:
Neonatal hemochromatosis is a disorder affecting fetuses and newborns. It is characterized by liver disease associated with the accumulation of excess iron in the liver and other areas of the body. Neonatal hemochromatosis is caused by severe fetal liver disease (see below). Some severe cases result in stillbirth, while live born infants with neonatal hemochromatosis typically show signs within 48 hours of birth. Neonatal hemochromatosis often produces life-threatening complications such as liver failure. However, some infants are less severely affected than others. There is a high risk of recurrence in subsequent pregnancies of women who have had a child with neonatal hemochromatosis. Although the exact cause of the disorder is not fully understood, researchers believe most cases of neonatal hemochromatosis result from maternal fetal alloimmunity, a condition in which antibodies from the mother travel over the placenta and mistakenly attack the fetus.

symptoms:
Neonatal hemochromatosis is characterized by liver disease that is present in the fetus or at birth (congenital). Damage to the liver occurs during pregnancy, ultimately leading to the abnormal accumulation of iron within tissue. Iron accumulation occurs while the fetus is developing in the womb and fetal loss late in pregnancy is common in families with a history of neonatal hemochromatosis. Growth delays within the womb (intrauterine growth deficiencies) are also common and many newborns are born prematurely.
Liver disease is usually apparent shortly after birth, although in rare cases it may not become apparent until days or weeks later. Symptoms of liver disease include low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), abnormalities in blood clotting (coagulopathy), yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice), decreased or absent urine production (oligouria) and swelling or puffiness due to fluid accumulation (edema), which may or may not occur in the abdomen (ascites). In many cases, scarring (cirrhosis), end stage liver disease and liver failure occur, sometimes within hours of birth. Iron accumulation may also occur in other organs including the pancreas, heart, thyroid, and salivary glands.
Neonatal hemochromatosis is considered a spectrum of disease with both severely affected and less severely affected infants. Some researchers speculate that some infants with neonatal hemochromatosis have no symptoms and the disorder may go undetected in such cases. In the medical literature, twins have developed neonatal hemochromatosis and one twin is severely affected while the other is only mildly affected.

