Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis

synonyms:
gadolinium-associated nephrogenic systemic fibrosisnephrogenic fibrosing dermopathyNSF

overview:
Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) is a rare disorder that occurs in some individuals with reduced kidney function, who have been exposed to an intravenous contrast material that contains gadolinium. A contrast material is a dye that is sometimes used during magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The term, fibrosis, refers to the thickening and scarring of connective tissue, most often the consequence of inflammation or injury. NSF is characterized by thickening and hardening (fibrosis) of the skin, subcutaneous tissues, and, sometimes, underlying skeletal muscle. The arms and legs are most often affected. In some cases, the skin on the trunk can also become involved. This proliferation of fibrotic tissue may become systemic, extending to other areas including the smooth, delicate membrane that surrounds the lungs (pleura), the sac surrounding the heart (pericardium), the thin sheet of muscle that aids respiration by moving up and down when breathing (diaphragm), and the outermost layer (dura mater) of the three membranes covering the brain and spinal cord.
NSF was thought to predominantly involve the skin and was originally referred to as nephrogenic fibrosing dermopathy. However, it is now known that it may involve several internal organs (systemic disorder), potentially leading to a progressive and severe disease course. NSF has not been reported in individuals with normal kidney function.
Since September of 2010, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has required that gadolinium-based contrast agents (GBCA) carry a warning on their labels about the risk of NSF when administered in certain individuals with kidney disease. In addition, the FDA also stated that three specific gadolinium-based contrast agents (Magnevist ®, OmniscanTM, and Optimark ®) were contraindicated in individuals with severe chronic kidney disease or acute kidney injury. These three agents were the ones most often associated with NSF.

symptoms:
The symptoms of NSF may develop slowly over a few weeks to a few months after exposure to gadolinium-based contrast agents. The severity and progression of the disorder can vary from one person to another. The disorder can have a rapid, progressive course and can cause debilitating symptoms. In rare, rapidly-progressive cases, NSF can contribute to the development of severe, life-threatening complications.
The initial symptoms of NSF usually involve the skin, with a gradual tightening or thickening effect. Affected individuals may experience reddened (erythematous) or darkened patches or papules especially on the extremities. The areas between the ankles and the thighs and the wrists and the upper arms are most commonly affected. Swelling (edema) may also occur and the skin may be itchy (pruritic). In some cases, the skin may appear shiny. Skin abnormalities are usually symmetric, which means that the size, shape and location of the lesions are similar on both sides of the body.
Over time, affected areas may eventually resemble the texture of an orange peel (peau d’orange). Skin hardening (induration) can become severe, causing chronic pain and loss of flexibility. The affected areas of skin can become hard to the touch. In general, the facial skin is not involved. In addition to the skin, underlying tissue may also be affected including the layer of connective tissue beneath the skin (subcutis), the tough band of fibrous tissue beneath the subcutis (fascia) and skeletal muscle.
In some cases, skin tightening and hardening may affect the range of motion and flexibility of the joints, causing contractures. A contracture is a condition in which a joint becomes permanently fixed in a bent (flexed) or straightened (extended) position, completely or partially restricting the movement of the affected joint. Severely affected individuals can lose the ability to walk or to fully extend the upper and lower limbs, potentially becoming wheelchair bound.
Complaints of muscle weakness are also common in individuals with NSF. Flesh-colored, reddish, or brownish papules (small, solid bumps arising from the skin) have been reported, and yellow scleral plaques (yellow areas in the whites [sclera] of the eyes) have also been observed.
Additional symptoms associated with NSF are highly variable depending upon the specific organ systems involved. NSF can potentially affect multiple organ systems and structures of the body including the lungs, hearts, esophagus and diaphragm. Involvement of the lungs or diaphragm can lead to a variety of breathing (respiratory) complications. Involvement of the heart can impair the ability of the heart to pump blood throughout the body.

