Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus

synonyms:
acquired nephrogenic diabetes insipiduscongenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidushereditary nephrogenic diabetes insipidusNDIvasopressin-resistant diabetes insipidus

overview:
Summary
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) is a rare kidney disorder that may be inherited or acquired. NDI is not related to the more common diabetes mellitus (sugar diabetes), in which the body does not produce or properly use insulin. NDI is a distinct disorder caused by complete or partial resistance of the kidneys to arginine vasopressin (AVP). Vasopressin is an antidiuretic hormone used by the kidney to manage water balance in the body. NDI causes chronic excessive urine production (polyuria). Patients must drink as much water as they excrete, leading to excessive thirst (polydipsia). Failure to do so can result in severe dehydration. If left untreated, repeated episodes of severe dehydration may develop, eventually resulting in serious complications including cognitive impairment. Most cases of hereditary NDI are due to changes (mutations or variants) in theAVPR2gene and are inherited in an X-linked pattern. Rare cases are due to variants in theAQP2gene and are inherited in an autosomal recessive or dominant pattern. NDI may also be acquired during life due to drugs (e.g., lithium therapy), kidney disease, obstruction of the tubes that carry urine from the kidneys to the bladder (ureters) and prolonged metabolic imbalances such as low levels of potassium in the blood (hypokalemia) or high levels of calcium in the blood (hypercalcemia). NDI may also be a temporary complication associated with pregnancy.
Introduction
The term nephrogenic diabetes insipidus was first used in the medical literature in 1947. In the past, the term diabetes insipidus renalis was used to denote this disorder. NDI is different from central diabetes insipidus, which is a rare disorder characterized by the inability of the body to produce vasopressin (rather than vasopressin resistance as in NDI).

symptoms:
The symptoms of NDI can vary from one person to another. Some individuals may be more severely affected than others. The acquired form is almost always less severe than the hereditary forms. In hereditary X-linked NDI, symptoms usually appear shortly after birth and most children are diagnosed within the first year of life. In autosomal dominant NDI, symptoms tend to appear later in life, sometimes not until adulthood. The acquired form of NDI most often occurs in adults and the onset of symptoms may be slow.
The two main symptoms of NDI are chronic excessive urine production (polyuria) leading to excessive thirst (polydipsia). Excessive urination at night (nocturia) also occurs. Some infants may present with vomiting, retching, unexplained fevers, lethargy and irritability. Constipation, diarrhea and poor feeding may also occur. As a result, some infants may fail to grow or gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive). In some patients, these symptoms may be mild and underappreciated.
Infants and adults with NDI may rapidly develop dehydration following low water intake, a hot environment or concurrent illness. Infants with NDI may experience repeated episodes of dehydration, which can result in weakness, confusion, dry mucous membranes, dry skin and weight loss. If left untreated, severe dehydration may develop. Repeated episodes of severe dehydration may result in significant abnormalities including seizures, brain damage, developmental delays and physical and intellectual disability. However, with proper diagnosis and prompt treatment, intelligence and development are usually normal.
Because of the chronic excretion of large amounts of urine, additional symptoms may develop as affected individuals age including bedwetting at night (nocturnal enuresis), abnormal accumulation of urine in the kidneys (hydronephrosis), swelling (distention) of the ureters with urine due to blockage (hydroureter) and an abnormally large bladder (megacystis). Some individuals develop widening (dilatation) of the urinary tract.
Adults with NDI may also develop orthostatic hypotension, a condition in which there is a dramatic decrease in blood pressure upon standing or sitting. Orthostatic hypotension can result in dizziness or momentary loss of consciousness (syncope).
Many individuals with NDI attain an adult height that is just below normal or where would be expected otherwise. This may result from unsuccessful management or inadequate nutrition during childhood (e.g., failure to thrive).

