Neurotrophic Keratitis

synonyms:
neurotrophic keratopathy

overview:
Neurotrophic keratitis is a rare eye disorder that affects the cornea. The cornea is the clear (transparent) outer layer at the front of the eye. It functions like a window that focuses the entry of light into the eye. The cornea bends light allowing it to pass through the pupil of the eye, eventually reaching the retina, where specialized cells called cones and rods convert light to nerve impulses. These impulses travel along the optic nerve to the brain to become images.
Neurotrophic keratitis is caused when the nerves that serve (innervate) the cornea do not function properly; these nerves carry impulses that help the cornea function by eliciting the blink reflex, promote wound healing and increase tear production. Patients with neurotrophic keratitis have reduced or absent sensitivity of the cornea. When the cornea senses stimulation or pressure, the eyelids will close, and tears will be produced to protect the cornea and the eye. Because these nerves do not function properly in neurotrophic keratitis, the outer layer of the cornea, called the epithelium, can break down, resulting in an epithelial defect. In more advanced neurotrophic keratitis, the inner layer called the cornea stroma can break down as well, resulting in thinning of the cornea. This is called stromal ‘melting’. In advanced stromal melting, the cornea can thin to a severe degree, which can result in a hole or opening to the inside of the eye, which can lead to infection and potentially loss of the eye. Neurotrophic keratitis can lead to a variety of complications, including poor wound healing of the cornea, scarring of the cornea and loss of vision. There are many different conditions that can damage the nerves serving the cornea. A variety of therapies can be used to treat this disorder depending on how far the disorder has progressed in an individual.

symptoms:
Early on, affected individuals may not have any symptoms of the disorder (asymptomatic). Because the sensitivity of the cornea is reduced, affected individuals often do not complain of pain or discomfort in the eye. Blurred vision, red eyes, dry eyes, and decreased clarity (acuity) of vision can develop. Affected individuals may become extremely sensitive to light (photophobia). The affected cornea can be injured easily, and it heals itself slower than an unaffected cornea does (poor wound healing). This leaves the cornea susceptible to damage. Affected individuals may experience frequent or recurrent corneal erosions, which is when an opening in the epithelial layer develops (epithelial defect). Since the epithelial layer is the protective layer of the cornea, an epithelial defect can leave the eye more susceptible to infection. Patients may or may not be aware of an open epithelial defect because of the reduced or lack of pain in this disease.
More serious complications can develop, including scarring of the cornea which may result in irregular astigmatism, a condition causing blurred vision that results when the cornea becomes irregularly shaped or abnormally curved. As the inner layer called the stroma breaks down and becomes thinner, the cornea can become even more irregularly shaped, and more severe scarring can develop. In the most severe instances, the cornea can completely melt in one area leading to perforation, which results in loss of the inner fluid of the eye. Neurotrophic keratitis can lead to permanent loss of vision if not properly treated.

