Neuroacanthocytosis

synonyms:
Levine-Critchley syndrome

overview:
Neuroacanthocytosis is a general term for a group of rare progressive disorders characterized by the association of misshapen, spiny red blood cells (acanthocytosis) and neurological abnormalities, especially movement disorders. Chorea, which is characterized by rapid, involuntary, purposeless movements, especially of the face, feet and hands, is the most common movement disorder associated with neuroacanthocytosis. Additional symptoms often develop including progressive cognitive impairment, muscle weakness, seizures and behavioral or personality changes. The onset, severity and specific physical findings vary depending upon the specific type of neuroacanthocytosis present. Neuroacanthocytosis syndromes typically progress to cause serious, disabling and sometimes life-threatening complications (and are usually fatal). These disorders are inherited although the mode of transmission can vary. There is disagreement in the medical literature about what disorders should be classified as forms of neuroacanthocytosis. Four distinct disorders are usually classified as the “core” neuroacanthocytosis syndromes – chorea-acanthocytosis, McLeod syndrome, Huntington’s disease-like 2 and pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN). Some medical sources also include abetalipoproteinemia and hypobetalipoproteinemia types I and II as forms of neuroacanthocytosis. This report concentrates only on the four “core” disorders of neuroacanthocytosis. NORD has a separate report on abetalipoproteinemia.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of neuroacanthocytosis can vary from one person to another, even among individuals with the same subtype or among individuals within the same family. It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
The age of onset and progression of these disorders also varies. Chorea-acanthocytosis and McLeod syndrome progress slowly over many years or decades during adulthood. In many cases, PKAN presents in childhood and rapidly progresses within 10 years. These disorders can all potentially progress to cause life-threatening complications.
All of these disorders share certain findings including abnormal involuntary movements, cognitive deterioration and acanthocytosis. The most common movement disorder associated with neuroacanthocytosis is chorea, which is characterized by rapid, involuntary, purposeless movements, especially of the face, arms and legs.
Although the neuroacanthocytosis syndromes are marked by the association of acanthocytosis and movement disorders, acanthocytosis does not occur in all cases (variable finding). Specifically, acanthocytosis refers to the presence of abnormally-shaped red blood cells called acanthocytes. Red blood cells are formed in the bone marrow and released into the bloodstream where they travel throughout the body delivering oxygen to tissue. Normally, red blood cells have a life span of approximately 120 days before they are removed by the spleen. Acanthocytes are abnormal red blood cells that have thorny or spiny projections of varying lengths protruding from the surface of the cell. They are also known as “spur” cells. Most adults normally have a small percentage of these unique red blood cells. When individuals have abnormally high levels of acanthocytes, it often indicates the presence of an underlying disorder. Specific symptoms that occur in association with acanthocytosis are related to the underlying cause of the condition.
Acanthocytosis occurs most often with chorea-acanthocytosis and McLeod syndrome. It is seen less frequently in individuals with Huntington’s disease-like 2 or PKAN.
CHOREA-ACANTHOCYTOSIS
Chorea affecting the arms and legs is the most common finding of chorea-acanthocytosis. Affected individuals may exhibit abnormal movements of the arms and legs, shoulder shrugs and pelvic thrusts. The abnormal movements of the arms and legs are often compared to dancing or piano playing. These movements may also cause an abnormal manner of walking (gait) characterized by lurching and involuntary knee flexion. In most cases, chorea begins in adulthood and is slowly progressive. In some cases, chorea-acanthocytosis can eventually progress so that individuals require a wheelchair or become bedridden.
In addition to chorea, individuals with chorea-acanthocytosis also exhibit dystonia. Dystonia is a general term for a group of neurological conditions characterized by involuntary muscle contractions that force certain part(s) of the body into abnormal, movements and positions (postures). Dystonia affecting the mouth and face is common in chorea-acanthocytosis.
Dystonia and chorea affecting the muscles of the face and tongue can cause a variety of symptoms. These symptoms may be referred to as orofacial and lingual dyskinesia and include protrusion of the tongue, grimacing, and abnormal jaw movements. Chronic teeth grinding, involuntary belching, drooling and spitting have also been reported. Many individuals will habitually bite the lip and tongue, potentially causing mutilation. Some affected individuals may eventually develop difficulty swallowing (dysphagia). The various orofacial and lingual dyskinesias can cause significant feeding problems and unintended weight loss. Difficulties with speech and communication, usually due to problems with the muscles that enable speech (dysarthria), are also common findings. Vocal tics such as grunting or involuntary speaking can also occur. Slurred speech is common and eventually chorea-acanthocytosis can progress to limit speech to grunting or whispering. In some cases, affected individuals may eventually become mute.
Less often, individuals with chorea-acanthocytosis develop parkinsonism, which is characterized by symptoms that resemble Parkinson’s disease including slow, stiff movements, tremors and low speech.
Other typical findings are nerve damage (peripheral neuropathy), resulting in absence of reflexes (areflexia) and sensory loss. Progressive wasting of muscle tissue (amyotrophy) and muscle weakness are often seen as well. Occasionally these are the first features to develop, and suggest a primary nerve or muscle disease. Seizures are seen in about 50 percent of people with this condition and can be a presenting sign.
A wide variety of personality or behavioral changes may occur in individuals with chorea-acanthocytosis including apathy, irritability, hyperactivity, depression, slowness of thought and emotional instability. Anxiety, paranoia, disinhibition, aggression, and self-neglect have also occurred. Some affected individuals develop obsessive-compulsive disorders such as chronic hair pulling (trichotillomania). Eventually, chorea-acanthocytosis may cause progressive memory loss and deterioration of intellectual abilities (dementia).
In the past, chorea-acanthocytosis was also known as Levine-Critchley syndrome. The family reported by Dr. Critchley has been genetically confirmed to have chorea-acanthocytosis, however, it is not known what the diagnosis was of the family reported by Dr. Levine, thus this term is imprecise. Sometimes, the term neuroacanthocytosis is used specifically to refer to chorea-acanthocytosis.
MCLEOD SYNDROME
McLeod syndrome is a rare multisystem disorder characterized by various abnormalities, especially those affecting the central nervous system. The specific symptoms can vary greatly from one person to another. The disorder predominantly affects males, although in rare cases females have developed some symptoms of the disorder.
Affected individuals may experience chorea, especially affecting the arms and legs but also affecting the trunk, face and neck. Chorea is slowly progressive and can eventually affect the ability to walk. Unlike chorea-acanthocytosis, lip and tongue biting are not typically seen in McLeod syndrome. Dystonia and parkinsonism are also far less common in McLeod syndrome than in chorea-acanthocytosis.
Affected males may also have muscle weakness, muscle degeneration, and absence of deep tendon reflexes usually due to nerve damage. In some cases, seizures may occur and can be the presenting sign of the disorder.
Cognitive impairment has also been reported in approximately 50 percent of cases. Cognitive impairment can cause memory loss as well as difficulties learning or processing new information. Cognitive impairment can affect a person’s ability to manage everyday tasks and activities. The severity of cognitive impairment in McLeod syndrome can vary greatly even among members of the same family. It can range from slight problems with memory to dementia.
Psychiatric problems may occur in McLeod syndrome including apathy, disinhibition, irritability, anxiety, distractibility, and depression. Some affected individuals may develop obsessive-compulsive disorder. In some families, psychiatric problems may predominate (as oppose to movement abnormalities).
Affected individuals may also develop heart (cardiac) problems including abnormal electrical activity in the heart (arrhythmia) and dilated cardiomyopathy. Dilated cardiomyopathy is characterized by abnormal enlargement or widening (dilatation) of one or ventricles which results in a weakening of the heart’s pumping action, causing a limited ability to circulate blood to the lungs and the rest of the body which may result in fluid buildup in the heart, lung and various body tissues (congestive heart failure).
Additional symptoms may occur in McLeod syndrome including an enlarged liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly).
A characteristic finding associated with McLeod syndrome is absent expression of the Kx red blood cell antigen and weak expression of Kell blood group antigens. Antigens are substances that cause immune system to produce antibodies. The Kx antigen is normally found on the surface of erythrocytes (red blood cells). These characteristic findings are referred to as the McLeod blood group phenotype. Because of abnormalities affecting these antigens, individuals with McLeod syndrome may be susceptible to adverse reactions to blood transfusions with incompatible blood. The exact role these antigens play in the development of McLeod syndrome is not fully understood.
HUNTINGTON’S DISEASE-LIKE 2
Huntington’s disease-like 2 (HDL-2) is an autosomal dominant disorder remarkably like Huntington’s disease but characterized by a trinucleotide repeat expansion in a different gene. Onset typically occurs in the third-fourth decade, with involuntary movements and abnormalities of voluntary movements, as well as dementia.
Specific symptoms may include a variety of movement disorders including dystonia and chorea Affected individuals may also develop excessive or exaggerated response of certain reflexes (hyperreflexia), extreme slowness of voluntary movements (bradykinesia) and difficulty with speech and communication. Cognitive impairment is typical and can eventually progress to cause dementia.
Behavioral and psychiatric problems may also occur in Huntington’s disease-like 2 including depression, anxiety, irritability, and apathy. Some affected individuals may experience delusions or hallucinations.
PANTOTHENATE KINASE-ASSOCIATED NEURODEGENERATION (PKAN)
PKAN is a form of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA). It is the largest subgroup of NBIA observed so far. The common feature among affected individuals is iron accumulation in the brain, along with a progressive movement disorder. Individuals can remain stable for long periods of time and then undergo intervals of rapid deterioration.
Common features include dystonia, an abnormality in muscle tone, muscular rigidity, and sudden involuntary muscle spasms (spasticity) that result in slow, stiff movements of the legs. These features can result in clumsiness, gait (walking) problems, difficulty controlling movement, and speech problems. Another common feature is degeneration of the retina (retinopathy), resulting in progressive night blindness and loss of peripheral (side) vision. In general, symptoms are progressive and become worse over time.
Atypical cases develop after the age of 20 and are characterized by dystonia, rigidity and gait abnormalities. The progression of the atypical cases is slower than in younger children and retinopathy does not occur. Speech abnormalities including dysarthria are common. Personality changes and progressive cognitive decline are also seen.

