Neurofibromatosis 1

synonyms:
NF1Von Recklinghausen's diseaseVon Recklinghausen's neurofibromatosis

overview:
Summary
Neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1), historically called von Recklinghausen’s disease, is a genetic disorder characterized by increased risk of developing noncancerous (benign) and cancerous (malignant) tumors, as well as various other physical and neurological manifestations. The most prevalent manifestations of the disease are multiple tumors of nerves and skin (neurofibromas), as well as areas of abnormal skin color (pigmentation). The abnormal skin color typically includes pale tan or light brown discolorations (cafe-au-lait spots), freckling in atypical locations such as under the arms (axillary region) or in the groin (inguinal region). Such abnormalities of skin pigmentation are often evident by one year of age and tend to increase in size and number through childhood.
At birth or early childhood, affected individuals may have relatively large, benign tumors that consist of bundles of nerves and other tissue (plexiform neurofibromas). It is estimated that up to 50% of patients with NF1 may have at least one plexiform neurofibroma. Individuals with NF1 may also develop benign nodules on the colored regions of the eyes (Lisch nodules), or tumors in the nerves of the visual pathway (optic pathway gliomas). More rarely, affected individuals may develop certain malignant (cancerous) tumors. For instance, the risk of breast cancer is significantly increased in women with NF1 compared to the general population, especially during the age range of 30-40 years old. Patients also carry 8-13% lifetime risk of developing a tumor known as malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST), often occurring due to cancerous transformation of a pre-existing benign plexiform neurofibroma. Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) is a tumor arising from the small intestine that may be either benign or malignant. Pheochromocytoma, which is a tumor on the adrenal gland, may increase blood pressure and pulse. Gliomas, tumors arising within the brain, may occur during childhood (especially in the vision pathway, known as optic pathway gliomas), or later in adulthood.
NF1 may also be characterized by an unusually large head size (macrocephaly) and relatively short stature. Additional abnormalities may also be present, such as episodes of uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain (seizures); learning disabilities and attention deficits; speech difficulties; abnormally increased activity (hyperactivity); and skeletal malformations, including progressive curvature of the spine (scoliosis), bowing of the lower legs (pseudoarthrosis), and improper development of certain bones. There is also an increased risk of vascular abnormalities with NF1, including a narrowing of the arteries to the kidneys (renal artery stenosis), which may cause early high blood pressure or aneurysms. Certain types of strokes may be more common with NF1. Associated symptoms and findings may vary greatly in range and severity from person to person, even within the same family. Learning disabilities appear in more than 50% of children with NF1.
NF1 is caused by changes (pathogenic variants) in a gene calledNF1, which is found on chromosome 17. This gene regulates the production of a protein known as neurofibromin, which is thought to function as a tumor suppressor. In about 50 percent of individuals with NF1, the disorder results from spontaneous (sporadic) changes in theNF1gene that occur for unknown reasons. These individuals do not inherit NF1 from their parents, but rather they are the first in their family with the disorder. In other patients, NF1 is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means that each child of an affected parent carries a 50% risk of inheriting the disease. NF1 does not skip generations.

symptoms:
The diagnostic criteria for NF1 were updated by international consensus in 2021. Based on the new criteria, an individual who does not have a parent diagnosed with NF1 will meet clinical diagnostic criteria for NF1 if they demonstrate at least two of the following:
(1) Six or more café-au-lait spots of at least 5 millimeters [mm] in size (before puberty) or 15 mm in size (after puberty)
(2) Freckling in the underarms (axillary) or groin (inguinal) regions
(3) Two or more neurofibromas of any type, or one plexiform neurofibroma
(4) Optic pathway glioma
(5) Two or more abnormal clumps of pigment on the colored portion of the eye (Lisch nodules) or two or more abnormalities in the back of the eye (choroidal abnormalities) seen with special imaging of the eye
(6) Certain abnormalities of bone development in the head (sphenoid wing dysplasia) or a bowing of the tibia bone in the leg or other long bones (pseudoarthrosis)
(7) A pathogenic variant in theNF1gene in normal tissue (such as blood, saliva) meeting certain technical criteria.
Notably, for individuals born to a parent with NF1 (meeting diagnostic criteria above), only one of the above criteria must also be met to reach the diagnosis of NF1.
Symptoms of NF1 usually begin during childhood, and a definite diagnosis can often be made by three years of age or younger, depending on the circumstance. The disorder is progressive across the lifetime. In some cases, NF1 symptoms have been described to worsen during puberty, pregnancy or when hormonal changes occur, though this correlation remains incompletely understood. The range and severity of NF1 symptoms varies greatly among affected individuals – even within the same family, and the rate of progression of this disorder is not predictable. However, a majority of patients (approximately 60%) are described as having a “mild” form of the condition.
Often the first sign of NF1 is the appearance of multiple brown spots on the skin (café-au-lait macules) or freckling in the underarm (axillary) or groin (inguinal) regions, which may occur as early as birth or infancy. Lisch nodules may also be present early in life, and are highly suggestive of an NF1 diagnosis, as they occur in approximately 97% of affected individuals.
Multiple noncancerous (benign) tumors (neurofibromas) develop in NF1 along the linings of the nerves (sheath) under the skin or in deeper areas of the body. Neurofibromas may form in any organ in the body. Skin (cutaneous) neurofibromas, under the skin (subcutaneous) neurofibromas or more diffuse neurofibromas (plexiform neurofibromas) may cause disfigurement. Occasionally, tumors may develop in the brain, on the nerves exiting the brain and/or on the spinal cord. The total number of neurofibromas in an adult may range from a few to hundreds or even thousands, and the number of these tumors tends to increase with age. Pain may occur from an affected peripheral nerve, or as a result of regional mass effect on adjacent structures. In 8-15% of affected individuals, neurofibromas may transform to become cancerous (malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors), which are associated with pain, rapid tumor growth or new neurological symptoms, and require urgent evaluation and treatment.
Approximately 15% of people with NF1 develop brain tumors (gliomas), which most commonly develop during childhood. These frequently develop on in the visual structures of the brain (optic pathway gliomas) and may affect vision, cause premature onset of puberty (precocious puberty) or increased head size (macrocephaly). Additionally, a variety of other tumors may develop in patients with NF1, including gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST). In women with NF1, there is a 4 to 11-fold increased risk of developing breast cancer compared to the general population before age 50, though this risk is the highest between 30 and 40 years old. Further, even after diagnosis of breast cancer on one side, there is a high risk of developing a second breast cancer in the opposite (contralateral) breast.
Orthopedic problems may develop with NF1, including curvature of the spine (scoliosis), abnormal cranial bone growth (sphenoid wing dysplasia) or a condition characterized by bowing and fracturing of weight-bearing long bones (pseudoarthrosis). Additionally, disorders of bone density (osteopenia and osteoporosis) are more common in people with NF1 than in the general population. The process by which these conditions develop is not fully understood, but has been associated with decreased activated vitamin D levels, increased parathyroid hormone levels, and increased markers of bone breakdown. People with NF1 tend to be below average in height, below average in muscle strength and above average in head size for age.
High blood pressure (hypertension) is seen with greater frequency in the NF1 population than the general population. While the cause for this is not certain, some cases may not directly relate to NF1, but rather to associated changes in the blood vessels leading to the kidneys (renal artery stenosis). More rarely, patients with NF1 are at risk of developing tumors of the adrenal gland (pheochromocytoma), which may cause severely elevated blood pressure without treatment.
Sexual development may be delayed or may occur early (precocious puberty) in individuals with NF1. (For more information on this disorder, choose “precocious puberty” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.) In addition, over 50% of individuals with NF1 experience learning disabilities such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Seizures may also occur. Other symptoms include headache, numbness and/or weakness.
In the localized form of NF1, known as segmental neurofibromatosis, abnormal pigmentation and/or tumors may be limited to one area of the body, and there may be an overall milder manifestation of the disease.

