Neuropathic Ocular Pain

synonyms:
neuropathic dry eyesneuropathic corneal paincorneal neuropathycorneal neuralgiakeratoneuralgia

overview:
Summary
Neuropathic ocular pain (NOP) refers to a constellation of persistent ocular pain symptoms (i.e., burning, increased sensitivity to light or wind, shooting pains originating in one or both eyes) that may present with or without ocular surface abnormalities.1In the past, NOP was considered a sub-type dry eye (DE), which is an umbrella term that represents various symptoms (e.g. sensations of dryness, pain, poor or fluctuating vision) and/or signs (e.g. decreased tear production, rapid tear break up, corneal epithelial disruption, ocular surface inflammation, high or unstable tear composition). In recent years, however, there is an understanding that NOP is better represented as an entity on its own.
Understanding the epidemiology of NOP is challenging as data regarding symptoms has been buried within the DE literature. Overall, DE symptoms are common in the general population. In the US, a population-based study out of Beaver Dam, Wisconsin found that 14% of individuals between the ages of 48 and 91 years reported symptoms, which included dryness and foreign body sensation.2A similar frequency was found in Salisbury, Maryland with 15% of the population reporting one or more symptoms (dryness, grittiness, burning, redness, crustiness, eyelids stuck shut) often or all the time.3These numbers were even higher in Asia, where 34% of participants in a Taiwanese study4and 28% of participants in an Indonesian study5reported these same symptoms often or all of the time. Ocular surface abnormalities (e.g. tear film and anatomy) are one cause of ocular symptoms. However, it is well recognized that ocular symptom severity does not correlate well with ocular surface findings6, suggesting that symptoms in many individuals are driven by other factors.
One such factor is corneal nerve dysfunction, which may manifest as hyposensitivity (“neurotrophic phenotype”) or hypersensitivity (“neuropathic phenotype”).7Corneal nerve hyposensitivity often manifests with cornea epithelial cell disruption with minimal ocular symptoms while corneal nerve hypersensitivity often manifests with pain out of proportion to ocular surface findings. In the latter case, ocular pain often persists despite treatment with traditional dry eye treatments.8
A neuropathic origin to ocular pain is suggested in individuals who have a particular set of symptoms (e.g., burning sensation, light or wind sensitivity), risk factors (e.g., pain that started after surgery, migraine, fibromyalgia) and treatment response history (e.g., poor response to therapies aimed at correcting ocular surface abnormalities).9NOP symptoms can be present in one or both eyes and start spontaneously or after trauma or surgery. NOP can be persistent, agonizing and severely affect quality of life and ability to work. When untreated, persistent symptoms can lead to extreme distress. The severity of symptoms is often not recognized and patients may be seen as drug-seeking or overly anxious by providers. A challenge is that many patients have few physical signs of ocular damage and the underlying cause of symptoms can be overlooked. Thus, there is a need to educate patients, eye care providers and pain specialists on this condition, recognize its effect on patients’ health and functioning and treat patients with empathy and urgency.
Introduction
The cornea has the densest sensory innervation in the body and can be a powerful producer of pain. Ocular surface pain is a frequent cause of visits to eye care providers and pain clinics, with a substantial negative impact on an individuals’ quality of life and mental health. Ocular surface pain can arise from a number of factors including tear film and anatomical abnormalities, environmental exposures and nerve dysfunction of the peripheral and central nerves that connect the cornea and conjunctivae to the brain. Causes of ocular surface pain are typically divided into nociceptive and neuropathic. Nociceptive causes include an unhealthy tear film (e.g., low tear production, rapid tear break up), anatomic abnormalities of the eyelids, conjunctiva and cornea, and environmental insults (e.g., low humidity, air pollution). However, corneal nerves and their central connections may become dysfunctional, leading to ocular surface pain. NOP falls under the umbrella terms of “ocular surface pain”, “ocular pain”, “eye pain” and “oculofacial pain”. NOP is a condition where individuals have ocular surface pain that is generated by nerve dysfunction. While there are no consensus criteria for the diagnosis, new advances in the understanding of clinical presentations and the neurobiology involved in ocular sensation have led to the classification of NOP as a distinct and important disease entity.

symptoms:
Symptoms of NOP include a host of ocular pain symptoms that have been described as dryness (with minimal or no relief with over-the-counter lubricating drops), burning, shooting, pressure-like pain, foreign body sensation, grittiness, aching, stabbing or cutting sensation and/or throbbing. Pain may occur spontaneously or be evoked by light (e.g., fluorescent room lights, sunlight), wind (e.g., indoor fans, in-clinic “air puff test” for eye pressure) and/or temperature changes (e.g., air conditioning, hair dryers, seasonal variation). One or both eyes may be involved. The onset may be sudden, as is usually the case when there is an identifiable trigger (such as trauma or surgery to the eye) or insidious. While the pain is typically chronic, its severity can range from mild to excruciating.10
Symptoms of NOP may be isolated to the eyes, but many individuals experience pain or aching in areas around the eye (e.g., heavy eyelids, pressure around the eyes, aching in the cheek bones, forehead, or temple) or describe pain radiating from the eye to the back of the head.
Visible ocular defects are notably absent or out of proportion to ocular surface findings in many cases of NOP. Given the shared and interrelated symptomatic pictures of NOP and dry eye, a thorough ocular surface examination is indicated when either condition is suspected. In general, absent or minimal signs of ocular surface disease (e.g., corneal epithelial disruption, low tear production, rapid tear break-up, anatomical abnormalities, meibomian gland dysfunction) points to NOP as a potential contributor to pain.

