Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome

synonyms:
basal cell nevus syndromeBCNSGorlin-Goltz syndromeGorlin syndromeHermans-Herzberg phakomatosisNBCCS

overview:
Summary
Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by a variety of developmental abnormalities and predisposition to cancer, particularly basal cell carcinoma of the skin. The specific symptoms and severity of NBCCS can vary greatly from one individual to another, even among members of the same family. Multiple organ systems can become involved. Common symptoms include multiple basal cell carcinomas, recurrent keratocystic odontogenic tumors of the jaws, pits of the palms and soles and skeletal malformations. Some affected individuals may have distinctive facial features. The onset of specific symptoms can vary, occurring anywhere from infancy through adulthood. Most cases of NBCCS are caused by changes (variants or mutations) in thePTCH1gene, but variants in theSUFUandPTCH2genes can cause a similar set of characteristics (phenotype). All three genetic forms of the disorder follow an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance but sporadic cases due to new (de novo) variants are common.
Introduction
In 1894, the first patients with NBCCS were described in the medical literature by two different doctors. However, it was not until 1960 that two physicians (Dr. Robert Gorlin and Dr. Robert Goltz) wrote the first in-depth description of NBCCS as a distinct clinical entity. Consequently, the disorder is also known as Gorlin syndrome or Gorlin-Goltz syndrome. Over the years, case reports and series have continued to expand the range of symptoms and physical findings that can be associated with NBCCS, and there are now more than 100 different recognized features.

symptoms:
NBCCS can potentially affect multiple organ systems in the body. However, affected individuals usually will not develop all of the symptoms discussed below. The severity of NBCCS can vary, and some individuals with mild forms can go undiagnosed, while others can have significant complications. Affected individuals and parents of affected children should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
Many affected individuals will develop basal cell carcinomas (BCC), a type of skin cancer. BCCs may appear as brownish, flesh-colored, or orange spots on the skin. They can also appear as red patches of skin or scars. In some patients, BCCs will be small growths or bumps (nodules), while in other individuals they may be flat or nearly flat. The number of BCCs that can develop ranges from only a few spots to thousands of lesions. These lesions can vary in size from less than 1 millimeter to approximately 10 millimeters. BCCs do not usually spread to other areas of the body, but they can become aggressive and invade local tissue. Localized infection can develop, and these lesions can crust, bleed and ulcerate. Sun-exposed areas of the skin are affected more often than areas that are not commonly exposed to the sun. The face, nape of the neck, back and chest are most commonly affected. If left untreated BCCs can cause disfigurement, especially if located on the face. The appearance and behavior of basal cell carcinomas in this syndrome do not differ in any way from sporadic BCCs.
BCCs usually develop between puberty and the mid-30s but can occur at almost any age. Cases have been reported in children as young as 2 years of age. At least one case was reported where BCCs did not develop until after 50 years of age. Approximately 10% of individuals with NBCCS, especially those with dark skin and limited sunlight exposure, may not develop any BCCs.
Keratocystic odontogenic tumors, also known as odontogenic keratocytes or jaw cysts, are the first presenting sign in many individuals with NBCCS. These benign, cystic tumors develop in the jaw bones, usually in the lower jawbone (mandible). Affected individuals usually develop multiple cysts. These growths can remain asymptomatic for many years and are often an incidental finding on dental X-rays.  However, if left untreated they often progress to cause pain, fractures, loose teeth or displacement of developing permanent teeth. The alignment of the jaw can be affected. Because of their aggressive nature, prompt treatment is recommended. Keratocystic odontogenic tumors usually appear in the first or second decade of life and have been reported in children as young as 5 years of age. Although their peak occurrence is during the second decade of life, these cysts can occur throughout an affected individual’s life.
Some individuals may develop hardening (calcification) of certain areas of the central nervous system such as the falx cerebri, which is the structure that divides the two hemispheres (cerebrum) of the brain. The falx cerebri consists of the dura mater, which is the outermost layer of the three membranes covering the brain. Other areas of the central nervous system may be affected as well. Abnormal calcification of structures within the central nervous system affects approximately 90% of affected individuals by the age of 20. This clinical finding is not associated with any symptoms.
Affected individuals may develop multiple distinctive small pits on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet (palmar-plantar pits). These pits are usually only 1-2 millimeters in size. They can be seen much more clearly after soaking the hands or feet in warm water for approximately 10 minutes. Affected individuals may also develop skin tags, which are common, soft small growths that hang off the skin. Individuals with NBCCS tend to develop more skin tags than would normally be seen. These growths are benign and painless, although they can be irritated by friction (e.g. clothes rubbing against them). However, there are many anecdotal reports of BCCs being mistaken for skin tags, especially in children, so evaluation of skin tags by a dermatologist is recommended in children who have not yet reached an age for routine skin exams. Small, bumps (epidermal cysts) are also common findings, usually found on the limbs and trunk.
At birth, infants may have certain characteristic features including macrocephaly, a condition characterized by a head circumference larger than would normally be expected based upon a child’s age and height. NBCCS is an overgrowth syndrome. Affected individuals are taller than their unaffected age- and sex-matched siblings. Additional early distinctive features include a bulging forehead (frontal bossing), widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), tiny white bumps or cysts on the skin (facial milia) and coarse facial features. Facial milia are most often found below the eyes or on the forehead. Rarely, affected individuals may be born with a cleft palate or cleft lip or additional eye abnormalities including abnormally small eyes (microphthalmia), cataracts, rapid involuntary eye movements (nystagmus) and a partial absence of tissue from the iris or retina (coloboma). Crossed eyes (strabismus), which are common in the general population, occur a bit more frequently in NBCCS. The eyes may appear sunken due to frontal bossing.
A variety of skeletal abnormalities may be associated with NBCCS including fused, splayed or missing ribs, abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis), extra fingers or toes (polydactyly), webbing of the fingers or toes (syndactyly) and Sprengel deformity, a condition characterized by elevation and/or underdevelopment of the shoulder blade (scapula), limited movement of the arm on the affected side and the development of a lump at the base of the neck due to elevation of the shoulder blade. Affected individuals may have a sunken chest (pectus carinatum) or a chest that protrudes outward (pectus excavatum). Some individuals may have spina bifida, a condition characterized by a malformation of the spinal column in which incomplete closure of certain vertebrae leaves a portion of the spinal cord exposed. Individuals with NBCSS generally have a mild form of spinal bifida, which may not be associated with symptoms, but can be associated with hydrocephalus in rare cases. Hydrocephalus is a condition in which accumulation of excess cerebrospinal fluid in the skull causes pressure on the brain.
Approximately 1% to 5% of affected individuals develop a medulloblastoma, the most common type of malignant brain tumor in children. Medulloblastomas occur in the cerebellum, the part of the brain located at the base of the skull just above the brainstem. The cerebellum is involved in many functions including coordination of voluntary movements and regulating balance and posture. Symptoms associated with a medulloblastoma can include headaches in the morning that improve as the day goes on, recurrent vomiting and difficulty walking and with balance. Medulloblastomas can spread to affect other areas of the central nervous system and the rest of the body. Medulloblastomas associated with NBCCS tend to occur around the age of 2, younger than in children without NBCCS (isolated medulloblastoma). In addition, when associated with NBCCS, this tumor is generally less aggressive than the isolated form. In most patients, the desmoplastic subtype of medulloblastoma develops. Medulloblastomas in NBCCS are more common in males than females by a ratio of approximately 3:1. (For more information on this disorder, choose “medulloblastoma” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
Individuals with NBCCS are at risk of developing additional tumors including cardiac or ovarian fibromas. Fibromas are benign tumors consisting of connective tissue. Cardiac fibromas are present at birth or shortly thereafter. These growths may not cause symptoms, or they can cause an irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia) or obstruct blood flow. Affected females may develop ovarian fibromas. These growths may not cause any symptoms unless they become large and calcified, potentially causing twisting (torsion) of the ovaries. Ovarian fibromas are not thought to affect fertility.
Additional tumors can develop including tumors that arise from the membranes (meninges) that line the brain and spinal cord (meningiomas), tumors of the muscles attached to the bone (rhabdomyosarcoma) and a benign tumor normally located inside the heart (rhabdomyomoma). Other brain tumors have been reported in individuals with NBCCS but may occur secondary to radiation therapy.
Cysts or polyps can form in various parts of the body including the bones, airway passages (bronchi), intestines and the fold of tissue of the peritoneum that supports and attaches the intestines to the wall of the abdomen (mesentery). The peritoneum is the membrane that lines the abdominal cavity. Mesenteric cysts are common and usually do not produce symptoms. Cysts on the brain have been found as well.
Additional symptoms and physical findings have been reported in individuals with NBCCS. These symptoms may include intellectual disability, seizures, middle ear anomalies, minor kidney abnormalities, absence of the internal carotid artery, an impaired ability to smell (anosmia) and hardening of the skin due to the accumulation of calcium deposits underneath the skin. Intellectual disability is unusual in patients with variants limited to thePTCH1gene and is often related to deletions or other chromosome rearrangements that affectPTCH1along with surrounding genes.
Various other forms of cancer have been reported to occur in individuals with NBCCS. However, it is unknown whether affected individuals have a predisposition to developing these cancers or whether their development is coincidental (i.e. independent of the disorder). More research is necessary to determine what forms of cancer are related to NBCCS and which forms are chance occurrences.

