Nevus Sebaceus Syndrome

synonyms:
epidermal nevus syndromeSchimmelpenning syndromeJadassohn sebaceous nevus syndromeSchimmelpenning-Feuerstein-Mims syndromeSolomon syndrome

overview:
Introduction
Nevus sebaceus syndrome is a rare multisystem disorder characterized by the presence of sebaceous nevi often distributed along the lines of Blaschko (patterns that represent the embryonic migration patterns of the skin) and accompanied by extracutaneous abnormalities. These abnormalities most commonly involve the brain, eyes and skeletal system, and less commonly affect the endocrine system, heart and kidneys. The skin lesions associated with this disorder are called nevus sebaceus—also referred to as sebaceous nevi—because they consist of an increased number of malformed sebaceous glands (small oil-producing glands in the skin) along with an overgrowth (hyperplasia) of the epidermis.
When the nevi have more sebaceous gland hyperplasia, they are referred to as sebaceous nevi and when they have few sebaceous glands and predominately epidermal overgrowth, they are referred to as epidermal nevi. Often the site of the nevus determines this, as the head and neck have more sebaceous glands, more nevus sebaceus are seen in these locations. Nevus sebaceus is the most common type of organoid epidermal nevus (which broadly encompasses abnormally formed adnexal skin elements, such as hair follicles and glands within the skin). Epidermal (including sebaceous) nevi are usually present at birth (congenital), although they might not be identified until later during childhood or after puberty. Affected individuals may also have abnormalities in other organs (nevus sebaceous syndrome). These abnormalities can include seizures, brain malformations, intellectual impairment, clouding (opacity) of the cornea or partial absence of tissue of the iris or retina (coloboma), spinal malformations, craniofacial differences, deformities of the arms and legs and endocrine abnormalities leading to hypophosphatemic (low potassium) rickets. Nevus sebaceus syndrome occurs randomly (sporadically) during the formation and development of the embryo. Research has shown this to be due changes or variants of theKRASandHRASgenes, which occur after fertilization (postzygotic) and are present in only some of the cells of the body—referred to as a “mosaic” pattern.

Summary
The term “epidermal nevus syndrome” is used interchangeably with nevus sebaceous syndrome. However, epidermal nevus syndrome no longer refers to a single entity but rather represents a group of distinct, but related multisystem disorders. Additional terms used to describe nevus sebaceus syndrome include Schimmelpenning syndrome, Schimmelpenning-Feuerstein-Mims syndrome, nevus sebaceous of Jadassohn and Jadassohn sebaceous nevus syndrome. Nevus sebaceous syndrome is now the preferred term.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms and severity of nevus sebaceus syndrome can vary greatly from one person to another. It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals or their parents should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
The characteristic skin lesion that affects individuals with nevus sebaceus syndrome is a sebaceous nevus, which is a type of epidermal nevus. These lesions are often small, isolated lesions–but when larger–are distributed along the lines of Blaschko, with the scalp (59.3%), face (32.6%) and neck being most commonly affected. The arms, legs and trunk may also be affected. The related birthmark, keratinocytic epidermal nevus, caused by the same gene variant, is more commonly found on the trunk and extremities and contains fewer sebaceous glands. Sebaceous nevi are usually salmon-colored or yellowish hairless, smooth patches. These lesions usually become more pronounced around puberty and may appear scaly, warty or thickened. When the scalp is involved, they present with associated areas of hair loss (alopecia). Sebaceous nevi may be prominent and easily noticeable at birth or be subtle and go unrecognized. Sometimes, sebaceous nevi do not become apparent until after puberty, when they go through the above-mentioned changes because of the increase in androgenic hormones that occur during this time. The lesions, apart from their appearance, usually do not cause additional symptoms. After puberty, sebaceous nevi may develop growths within them. Although these were once thought to represent skin cancer (basal cell carcinoma), we now know that most of these growths are benign.
Nevus sebaceous lesions most often occur as an isolated finding and are not usually associated with abnormalities in other organs. However, when they occur with additional symptoms in organs other than the skin, the term “nevus sebaceus syndrome” is appropriate. Some researchers have noted that central facial epidermal (sebaceous) nevi may be more likely to be associated with malformations of the brain, eyes and cranial bones.
Neurological abnormalities are the most common finding in individuals with nevus sebaceus syndrome, affecting approximately 66% of patients. These include seizures, delays in attaining developmental milestones, intellectual impairment, damage to certain cranial nerves and abnormalities of certain structures of the brain. Such abnormalities include one side of the brain being larger than the other (hemimegaloencephaly), malformation (dysplasia) of certain brain vessels and absence (agenesis) of the bundle of nerves that connects the two cerebral hemispheres (corpus callosum). Defects in the folding of the brain have also been recorded, including the presence of a smooth brain that lacks distinctive folds (agyria), abnormally small folds (microgyria) and abnormally thickened folds (pachygyria).
Individuals with nevus sebaceus syndrome may also have Dandy-Walker malformation, a rare malformation of the brain that is present at birth. It is characterized by an abnormally enlarged space at the back of the brain (cystic 4th ventricle) that interferes with the normal flow of cerebrospinal fluid through the openings between the ventricle and other parts of the brain (foramina of Magendie and Luschka). Excessive amounts of fluid accumulate around the brain and cause abnormally high pressure within the skull, leading to swelling of the head (congenital hydrocephalus) and neurological impairment. Motor delays and learning problems may also occur. Dandy-Walker malformation is a form of “obstructive” or “internal noncommunicating hydrocephalus”, meaning that the normal flow of cerebrospinal fluid is blocked resulting in the widening of the ventricles. Dandy-Walker malformation is often associated with partial agenesis of a part of the cerebellum known as the cerebellar vermis. (For more information on this disorder, choose “Dandy-Walker” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
Ocular abnormalities also occur in 59% of people with nevus sebaceus syndrome, including a partial absence of tissue (coloboma) from the colored portion of the eye (iris) or the membrane lining the back of the eyes (retina), tumor-like growths (choristomas), clouding (opacity) of the cornea, crossed eyes (strabismus), defects of the optic nerve, and scarring degeneration or detachment of the retina. Some individuals may have a benign, yellowish-white, fatty tumor on the outer portion of the eyeball (epibulbar lipodermoid). A sebaceous nevus on the face can potentially involve structures of the eye including the eyelids and the thin, clear membrane that covers the outer surface of the eye (conjunctiva). These can lead to visual disturbances effect.
Skeletal malformations exist in approximately 50% of individuals; these can include abnormal curvature of the spine, dislocation of the hip and deformities of the limbs. Craniofacial differences—such as an unusually prominent forehead (frontal bossing), underdeveloped nasal and orbital bones and asymmetry of the skull—may also occur. Additional skeletal malformations may include bone cysts, underdevelopment of the pelvis and incomplete formation of certain bony structures including the ankle, foot and bones of the spinal column (vertebrae).
Less often (10% of patients), genitourinary abnormalities may also occur, namely: hydronephrosis, a double collecting system, fusion of the kidney (horseshoe kidney), cystic kidney, misplacement of the opening of the urethra (hypospadias), failure of the testicles to descend (cryptorchidism), testicular tumors and uteropelvic junction obstruction. Individuals with nevus sebaceus syndrome may also develop vitamin D-resistant rickets, a condition characterized by bow deformities of the legs, pain in the legs and progressive softening of the bone structure due to deficiencies in calcium and phosphate. In children, growth rates may be slow, ultimately resulting in short stature. Affected individuals may be prone to fractures.
It is reported in medical literature that 12% of patients with nevus sebaceus syndrome have various types of heart malformations. These include atrial septal defect, ventricular septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus, patent foramen ovale, coarctation of the aorta, hypoplasia of the aorta, arterial flutter/fibrillation and arterial premature systoles. It has also been determined that vascular malformations occur with a higher frequency (12.6% to 33%) in patients with nevus sebaceus syndrome compared with the general population (<1%).

As mentioned above, sebaceous nevi are associated with an increased risk of developing secondary benign skin tumors such as trichoblastoma, syringocystadenoma papilliferum, and other benign basaloid tumors. Malignant secondary tumors, such as basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma and sebaceous carcinoma in association with a sebaceous nevus are very rare.

