NF2-Related Schwannomatosis

synonyms:
Bilateral acoustic neurofibromatosis (BANF)Central neurofibromatosisNF2Neurofibromatosis tipo IINeurofibromatosis 2

overview:
NF2-related schwannomatosis (NF2; previously known as neurofibromatosis 2) is a rare genetic disorder that is primarily characterized by noncancerous (benign) tumors of the nerves that transmit balance and sound impulses from the inner ears to the brain (bilateral acoustic neuromas/vestibular schwannomas). Symptoms may become apparent during childhood, adolescence, early adulthood or later in adult life. Depending on the exact location and size of the acoustic neuromas/vestibular schwannomas, or other schwannomas such findings may include problems with balance and walking (gait); dizziness; headache; facial weakness, numbness, or pain; but more typically ringing in the ears (tinnitus); and/or progressive hearing loss.
In some individuals with NF2, additional abnormalities may be present. These may include clouding of the lenses of the eyes (juvenile posterior subcapsular opacities), progressive visual impairment, or an increased risk of developing certain tumors of the lining of the brain (meningiomas or ependymomas) and spinal cord (central nervous system).
NF2 results from changes (mutations or variants) in theNF2gene. TheNF2gene regulates the production of a protein that functions as a tumor suppressor. In more than half of individuals with NF2, the disorder is caused by spontaneous (new) variants in the gene. In other affected individuals, NF2 is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.
Introduction
The term “neurofibromatosis” is also used to describe the second, distinct, and much more common form of NF known as neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1). NF1 is primarily characterized by the development of multiple benign tumors of nerves and skin (neurofibromas) and areas of abnormally decreased or increased coloration (hypo- or hyperpigmentation) of the skin, such as pale tan or light brown discolorations (café-au-lait spots) on the skin of the trunk or other regions. In contrast, in individuals with NF2, benign fibrous tumors of the skin (cutaneous neurofibromas) and multiple areas of abnormal color (pigmentation) are considered relatively uncommon. As with NF2, NF1 may be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern or occur randomly due to new gene variant. NF2 is now classified along with other forms of schwannoma predisposition such asSMARCBandLZTR1-related schwannomatosis.

symptoms:
The characteristic symptoms of NF2 usually develop around the time of puberty or during early adulthood. These symptoms may include problems with balance, buzzing or ringing in the ears (tinnitus) and/or gradual hearing loss. These symptoms usually result from the presence of benign tumors on both vestibular nerves pressing on the adjacent auditory nerves (acoustic neuromas vestibular schwannomas). Almost all affected individuals develop bilateral vestibular schwannomas by age 30 years. Other tumors of the central nervous system may also develop, and can include hybrid tumors, meningiomas, low grade ependymomas of the spinal cord), and non-vestibular schwannomas on the other cranial nerves, spinal nerves or peripheral nerves. The size, location, and number of tumors may vary in different people affected. (For more information on tinnitus, choose “tinnitus” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
Individuals with NF2 may also develop cloudiness on the lenses of the eyes (posterior capsular cataracts) at a younger age than would otherwise be expected. Symptoms of cataracts may include impaired vision, and, in some cases, the progressive loss of vision, although surgery is not usually required.
People with NF2 generally have fewer brown spots (café-au-lait) on the skin than those who have NF1. Affected individuals may also experience spasms of the facial muscles; generalized muscle weakness, numbness, pain, and/or partial paralysis; difficulty swallowing; and/or impaired speech. Other neurological problems may also develop including headaches and/or seizures.

