NGLY1 Deficiency

synonyms:
NGLY1-related congenital disorder of deglycosylationNGLY1-CDDGNGLY1-related disorder

overview:
NGLY1 deficiency is a rare disorder that can affect multiple systems of the body. Affected individuals may have delays in reaching developmental milestones, intellectual disability, movement disorders, seizures, liver disease, and an inability to produce tears when they cry (alacrima), or they may produce tears very infrequently. The specific symptoms and severity of this disorder can vary dramatically among affected individuals. Additional symptoms can develop in some children. NGLY1 deficiency is caused by a disease causing (pathogenic) variant (mutation) in theNGLY1gene. This variant is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. As of April of 2021, fewer than 100 individuals with NGLY1 deficiency have been identified. It is possible that only the most severely affected children have been diagnosed and that descriptions of this disorder reflect these severely affected individuals. This happens because more severely affected children are more likely to be referred to specialists, receive genetic testing, and receive a diagnosis. Some researchers believe that affected individuals with milder forms of NGLY1 deficiency most likely exist.

symptoms:
Although researchers have been able to establish a clear syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about the disorder is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified cases, the lack of large clinical studies, and the possibility of other genes influencing the disorder prevent physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. As researchers learn more about the disorder, the potential spectrum or specific pattern of symptoms will be clearer. Therefore, it is important to note that every child is unique and that an individual child may not have all the symptoms discussed below.
Affected infants often have diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), in which the baby is described as excessively “floppy.” About half have a low weight at birth and, despite a normal appetite, many infants will fail to gain weight or grow as would be expected based on their age and gender (failure to thrive). Some infants have difficulty swallowing and are at risk of food or liquids going down the wrong tube and ending up in the lungs (aspiration). Constipation can also occur. In some children, the circumference of the head, which is normal at birth, may be smaller than would be expected as they age (acquired microcephaly).
Most affected infants and children may not produce tears or produce few tears when they cry (alacrima). This can lead to complications including inflammation of the eyelids (blepharitis), eye infection, irritation and open sores on the cornea, the transparent layer atop the eye (corneal ulceration). The eyes may not be aligned properly and may point in different directions (strabismus). In a few children, there was degeneration of the main nerve that transmits sensory input to the brain to form images (optic atrophy) and pigment changes in the membrane lining the back of the eyes (retina), and abnormalities of certain cells of the retina called cone cells (cone dystrophy). Vision impairment has been described in some children as well.
Neurodevelopmental symptoms are common in NGLY1 deficiency including delays in reaching developmental milestones like sitting up, crawling, or walking. As they age, children may have difficulty walking independently or be unable to walk. There may be delays in speech development, and children are often unable to speak or can only speak a few words. Intellectual disability is common and can range from children with below average IQ scores to significant intellectual disability.
Most affected children may have a complex movement disorder that includes quivering or shaking (tremulousness) and abnormally increased and sometimes uncontrollable muscle spasms (hyperkinesis). Specific movement abnormalities include choreoathetosis, action tremor, myoclonic movements, dystonic movements, and dysmetria. Choreoathetosis is characterized by irregular, rapid, jerky movements that may occur in association with slow, writhing movements. Other types of abnormal movements can develop including a slight tremor when trying to perform a task (action tremor), twitching or jerking (myoclonic movements) movements, involuntary muscle contractions that force the body into abnormal (and sometimes painful) movements or positions (dystonic movements), and a lack of coordination and accuracy in voluntary movements (dysmetria), which means affected individuals will under- or overreach when trying to grab an object, or under- or overstep when walking.
Some children may have elevated levels of certain liver enzymes, which normally indicate liver dysfunction or damage. Mild scarring (fibrosis) of the liver can develop. One individual developed severe acute liver failure that resolved. Most of the time, the liver enzyme levels improve as a child ages. Sometimes, the liver may be larger than normal (hepatomegaly).
Some children have developed seizures of various types. The age of onset for seizures has ranged from two months to 10 years old. Sometimes, the seizures have responded to medications and other times they have continued despite drug therapy (intractable seizures).
A variety of skeletal problems have been reported including small hands or feet, recurrent fractures, a defect of the hip that causes the thigh bone to angle out to the side of the body (coxa valga), abnormal sideways curvature of the spine (scoliosis), joints that are loose and have a larger range of motion than normal (joint hypermobility), and partial (subluxation) or full dislocations of certain joints like the hip or shoulder.
A few affected children have been prone to developing repeated, severe respiratory infections. Most children, however, are no different or have fewer infections than unaffected children.
Some affected individuals develop peripheral neuropathy, a condition that occurs when nerves that carry messages to and from the brain and spinal cord to the rest of the body are damaged. Those affected may experience tingling, burning, numbness, and stabbing pain. As it progresses, peripheral neuropathy can lead to sores or infections in the feet that don’t heal, weakness, and balance and walking problems.Some children experience hearing loss. The ears function normally, but the way the brain processes sound is abnormal (auditory neuropathy). Additional symptoms can include an abnormally large spleen (splenomegaly), temporary, recurrent interruptions of breathing during sleep (sleep apnea), a disturbed sleep pattern, diminished reflexes or an inability or reduced ability to sweat; this may make it difficult for affected individuals to regulate body temperature (causing them to overheat) during warm months.
Adrenal insufficiency has been reported in NGLY1 deficiency. The adrenal glands, located on to of the kidneys, make hormones. In adrenal insufficiency, the adrenal glands cannot make enough hormones needed to respond to stress, regulate blood pressure, and regulate sexual development. This can lead to serious illness, especially in times of stress, such as during an infection.

