Niemann Pick Disease Type C

synonyms:
NPCNPD-C

overview:
Summary
Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC) is a rare progressive genetic disorder characterized by an inability of the body to transport cholesterol and other fatty substances (lipids) inside of cells. This leads to the abnormal accumulation of these substances within various tissues of the body, including brain tissue. The accumulation of these substances damages the affected areas. NPC is highly variable and the age of onset and specific symptoms can vary from one person to another, sometimes even among members of the same family. NPC can range from a fatal disorder within the first few months after birth (neonatal period) to a late onset, chronic progressive disorder that remains undiagnosed well into adulthood. Most cases are detected during childhood and progress to cause life-threatening complications by the second or third decade of life. NPC is caused by mutations in the NPC1 gene (NPC type 1C) or the NPC2 gene (NPC type 2C) and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
Introduction
NPC belongs to a larger group of more than 50 disorders known as lysosomal storage disorders. Lysosomes are membrane-bound compartments within cells. They contain enzymes that break down large molecules such as proteins, carbohydrates and fats into their building blocks. Abnormal functioning of a transport protein leads to the accumulation of cholesterol and other fatty substances in various tissues of the body, including brain tissue. NPC used to be grouped together with two other disorders, named Niemann-Pick disease type A and Niemann-Pick disease type B. However, researchers have determined that the underlying defect in types A and B involves mutations in the SMPD1 gene and deficiency of the enzyme acid sphingomyelinase, which does not occur in NPC. Niemann-Pick disease types A and B are now considered a distinct disorder called acid sphingomyelinase deficiency. NORD has a separate report in the Rare Disease Database on this disorder. Niemann-Pick disease type D is an obsolete term for a condition in a group of individuals in Nova Scotia, Canada who have NPC due to a specific founder mutation of the NPC1 gene. This form is clinically indistinguishable from NPC. Additional terms have been used in the past to describe NPC including DAF (down gaze palsy, ataxia, foam cells) syndrome, juvenile dystonic lipidosis, lipid histiocytosis, and sea blue histiocyte disease. These terms are now considered obsolete.

symptoms:
Individuals with NPC can have onset of symptoms at different ages that have been grouped historically as: perinatal (shortly before and after birth), early infantile (3 months to < 2 years), late infantile (2 to < 6 years), juvenile (6 to < 15 years), and adult (15 years and greater).  NPC affects neurologic and psychiatric functions, as well as various internal organs (visceral).  Symptoms arise at different times and follow independent progression.  Visceral symptoms are more typically seen in individuals presenting at a younger age.  Neurologic and psychiatric symptoms often occur slowly over time, and thus feature more prominently in individuals presenting in the later age groups.
Because NPC is a highly variable disorder, it is important to note that affected individuals will not have all of the symptoms described below and that every individual case is unique. Some children will develop severe, life-threatening complications early in life; others have a mild disease that may go undiagnosed well into adulthood. Parents should talk to their child’s physician and medical team about the specific symptoms and overall prognosis.
In perinatal NPC, the accumulation of fluid in the fetal abdomen (fetal ascites) may be present and persist after birth. These infants often have prolonged severe interruption or suppression of the flow of bile from the liver (cholestasis). Features of cholestasis include yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes and whites of the eyes (jaundice), failure to thrive, and growth deficiency. Enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly) or spleen (splenomegaly) is present in a high percentage of affected individuals in this age group. Lipid-containing (foam) cells may accumulate in the lungs, resulting in lung disease. Liver and lung disease can progress to cause life-threatening complications during this period. Surviving individuals will develop neurological symptoms at a later age.
In the early infantile period, affected individuals may present with abnormal enlargement of the liver or spleen as the only noticeable symptom (isolated hepato-/splenomegaly), and that may remain the only symptom for many years. In other cases, additional symptoms develop including lack of muscle tone (hypotonia) often by 1 or 2 years of age. Affected individuals may also experience delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and physical activities (delayed psychomotor development).
A characteristic early finding in children with NPC is impairment of the ability to look upward and downward (vertical supranuclear gaze palsy or VSGP). Specifically, affected children lose their ability to rapidly move their eyes up and down. To compensate, they may blink their eyes, jerk their heads, or make abnormal movements. Eventually, vertical eye movements are lost, and side to side (horizontal) eye movements are also affected.
Hearing loss can occur in some individuals with NPC. Affected individuals may develop high frequency sensorineural hearing loss, in which transmission of sensory inputs from the auditory nerves to the brain is impaired. Up to 74% of individuals develop clinically significant hearing loss in at least one ear. Hearing loss may be the first problem seen in adults.
The classic presentation of NPC occurs during middle to late childhood with clumsiness or difficulty in drawing and writing, often noted by teachers and parents. VSGP may be first reported during this time from a careful neurological exam or observations by the parents. Other neurological abnormalities may be the first apparent symptoms, specifically lack of muscle coordination (cerebellar ataxia). Children with cerebellar ataxia often have difficulties with balance and trouble with walking (unsteady gait). They may fall frequently and be considered clumsy. Affected children may also experience progressive difficulty speaking (dysarthria), resulting in slurred and eventually unintelligible speech. Children may lose previously acquired speech skills. Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) may also develop and can become progressively worse, so that modifications such as thickening fluids or using special utensils may be recommended. Eventually a feeding tube may be required to maintain adequate nutrition. The dysphagia can lead to trouble swallowing saliva and other secretions. This may result in the inhalation of foreign materials into the airways and lungs (aspiration pneumonia).
During this time, affected individuals may also develop slowly progressive impairment of intellectually ability (cognitive impairment) that can initially be mistaken for learning disabilities. Furthermore, psychiatric disturbances and the progressive loss of memory and intellectual ability (dementia) can develop.
Additional neurologic findings can include drooling, epileptic seizures, and cataplexy.  Cataplexy is characterized by a sudden loss of muscle tone and strength that can cause a sudden head drop, a weak, rubbery sensation in the legs, or in severe cases collapse. Cataplexy is often caused by strong emotions, typically laughter, in individuals with NPC (gelastic cataplexy). Dystonia, a large group of movement disorders, is also common. Dystonia is generally characterized by involuntary muscle contractions that force the body into abnormal, sometimes painful, movements and positions (postures). Some individuals may develop a tremor marked by rhythmic, jerking movements (myoclonic tremor). Sleep disturbances or irregularities such as narcolepsy or sleep apnea have also been reported.
Adolescent or adult onset of NPC may be associated with a similar neurological presentation as in childhood onset. However, the rate of progression is often much slower. Specific manifestations may vary, but can include cerebellar ataxia, dysarthria, dysphagia, cognitive impairment, and other movement disorders such as dystonia or tremor. VSGP is invariably present, but can be difficult to appreciate initially. Although systemic symptoms are more common in infancy or childhood, they can also occur in individuals with adolescent or adult onset NPC. Isolated splenomegaly may be the presenting symptom in some adolescents or adults.
Psychiatric issues that have been described in individuals with adolescent onset of NPC include learning difficulties, behavioral problems, difficulty with expressive language, and attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder. Psychotic or manic episodes may occur in some affected individuals. Adults greater than 30 years of age may experience impairment of executive functions (dysexecutive syndrome) characterized by problems with complex thinking and reasoning tasks such as difficulty with organization and planning.
In some cases, older adults may first be misdiagnosed with dementia or psychiatric illness such as major depression or schizophrenia. Individuals have been described in the medical literature with other psychiatric manifestations such as obsessive-compulsive disorder, bipolar disorders, and hallucinations.
Following a long term gradual neurological decline death often results from aspiration pneumonia and subsequent respiratory failure, or intractable epilepsy not responding to medical intervention.

