Non-24-Hour Sleep-Wake Disorder

synonyms:
circadian rhythm sleep disorder, free-running typefree-running disorderhypernychthemeral syndromeN24non-24non-24-hour disordernon-24-hour sleep-wake cycle disordernon-24-hour sleep-wake syndrome

overview:
Non-24-hour sleep-wake disorder (N24) is a circadian rhythm sleep disorder in which an individual’s biological clock fails to synchronize to a 24-hour day. Instead of sleeping at roughly the same time every day, someone with N24 will typically find their sleep time gradually delaying by minutes to hours every day. They will sleep at later and later clock times until their sleep periods go all the way around the clock. (In extremely rare cases the sleep rhythm will gradually advance rather than delay.) Patients’ cycles of body temperature and hormone rhythms also follow a non-24-hour rhythm. Attempts to fight against this internal rhythm and sleep on a typical schedule result in severe and cumulative sleep deprivation. N24 occurs in 55-70% of completely blind people, but also occurs in an unknown number of sighted people.

symptoms:
As most people are required to keep a regular schedule for work, school, or other social obligations, the first symptoms of N24 usually noticed are periodic night-time insomnia and excessive daytime sleepiness. Due to the cyclical nature of the disorder, some affected persons will tend to feel normal for periods of days to weeks when their body’s rhythm is synchronized with the rhythm of society around them. As the individual’s body once again desynchronizes from the rhythms of the light-dark cycle (or day-night cycle) and the obligations the individual with N24 is trying to maintain, the insomnia and excessive daytime sleepiness will return.
The sleep cycle of persons with N24 usually ranges from just over 24 hours (e.g. 24.1 hours) to as many as 28-30 hours in extreme cases. Cases with cycles less than 24 hours (which would be expected to result in a gradually advancing rhythm) are extremely rare.
When allowed to sleep on their own cycle, some individuals with N24 will find relief of their symptoms of insomnia and fatigue, at the cost of the ability to maintain a schedule required for social and occupational requirements. However, some people with N24 will continue to experience fatigue, grogginess, malaise and disrupted sleep on any schedule, possibly because of continued desynchronization of their internal circadian rhythms. Recent research has documented that in addition to the central clock in the brain, virtually every cell in the body has a molecular clock, and scientists speculate that desynchronization of multitude of clocks is what underlies these symptoms.
If N24 is not detected and addressed, and the person attempts to stay on a 24-hour schedule, the symptoms of chronic sleep deprivation will accumulate, such as excessive daytime sleepiness, fatigue, depression, difficulty concentrating, and memory problems. N24 can be severely disabling as it causes extreme difficulty for the individual attempting to maintain social and career obligations. Isolation and loneliness can also be issues due to periodically being awake when others are asleep.

