Nonketotic Hyperglycinemia

synonyms:
glycine encephalopathyNKH

overview:
Non-ketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH) is a rare, genetic, metabolic disorder caused by a defect in the enzyme system that breaks down the amino acid glycine, resulting in an accumulation of glycine in the body’s tissues and fluids. There is a classical form of NKH and a variant form of NKH. The classical form is then further divided into severe disorder or an attenuated form (mild form).

symptoms:
The severe classic form of NKH typically presents in the first week of life with low muscle tone, lethargy, seizures, coma, and apnea requiring ventilator support. The ventilator is typically needed for a period of 10-20 days before the apnea resolves. A portion of individuals with severe classical NKH die during the neonatal period, often due to withdrawal of intensive care supports.  All children with severe classical NKH who survive the neonatal period have severe developmental delay. Most individuals do not reach milestones past those reached by the typical 6-week-old infant. Seizures gradually worsen and can be difficult to control. Feeding difficulties and orthopedic problems can occur. Airway maintenance becomes poor over time due to low muscle tone, and is often the cause of death.
Individuals with attenuated classic NKH can present in the neonatal period or later in infancy. Presentation in the neonatal period resembles that of severe classic NKH. Those who present in infancy can have low muscle tone, lethargy, and seizures. Individuals with attenuated classic NKH have variable developmental progress. Developmental delays can range from mild to profound. They can often walk and achieve various motor skills. They often have hyperactivity and behavioral problems.
The clinical picture of individuals with variant NKH is rapidly evolving. Presentation varies depending upon what gene is mutated and the specific mutation itself. Particular symptoms can include: problems with spasticity or balance, problems with the nerve of the eye (optic neuropathy), problems with the white matter of the brain, heart weakness, increased resistance to blood flow in the lungs, accumulation of acid in the blood, loss of skills that the child had achieved, or seizures. Most children have only some of these problems.

