Nontuberculous Mycobacterial Lung Disease

synonyms:
Mycobacteria other than tuberculosis (MOTT)Nontuberculous Mycobacterial DiseaseNontuberculosis MycobacteriumNTM

overview:
Nontuberculous mycobacterial (NTM) lung disease is a general term for a group of disorders characterized by exposure to specific bacterial germs known as mycobacteria. These germs are found in the water and soil and are common throughout the environment as a whole. They usually do not cause illness. The term ‘nontuberculous’ is used to differentiate these disorders from the mycobacterium that cause tuberculosis (i.e. mycobacterium tuberculosis complex). These disorders also exclude Mycobacterium leprae, the mycobacterium that causes leprosy. In NTM disorders, the severity of infection and the disease course can vary greatly from one person to another. The most common symptoms include a persistent cough, fatigue, weight loss, night sweats, and occasionally shortness of breath (dyspnea) and coughing up of blood (hemoptysis). Less often, NTM infection can cause skin or soft tissue infections or infection and inflammation of the lymph nodes (lymphadenitis). Most evidence indicates that these infections are not transmitted from one person to another, but are acquired from the environment. NTM lung disease most commonly affects people with an underlying lung disease such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), bronchiectasis, cystic fibrosis, primary ciliary dyskinesia, and alpha-1-antitrypsin disease, but individuals with no prior history of lung disease can also be affected. Less severe infections may not require treatment. In other cases, the infection can become chronic requiring ongoing treatment.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity can vary greatly from one person to another. The reason for this variability is not fully understood. Chronic lung infection is the most common complication affecting approximately 94% of individuals. The symptoms are usually nonspecific and similar to the symptoms seen in other lung or respiratory infections. Such symptoms include cough, fatigue, shortness of breath (dyspnea), coughing up of blood (hemoptysis), excessive mucus (sputum) production, fever, night sweats, loss of appetite, and unintended weight loss. Wheezing and chest pain may also occur. Affected individuals may experience recurrent respiratory infections. In some cases, these infections can cause progressive damage to the lungs and, eventually, the lungs will not function as well as they should (impaired lung function).
There are two main clinical presentations for NTM infection, which means that the symptoms and signs associated with this disorder are expressed in two specific ways. The less severe form is known as nodular bronchiectasis, in which the airways of the lungs become damaged, and subsequently dilate and become scarred. The airways can lose their ability to clear mucus and the mucus that accumulates within the airways can serve as a nutrient source and home for NTM, helping it to evade the immune system. Infiltrates can accumulate in the lungs particularly in the right middle lobe or the lingula, a small tongue-like projection from the upper left lobe of the lungs. Infiltrates is a nonspecific term describing substances that abnormally accumulate in the lungs or airways. Infiltrates can be pus, blood, or protein-rich fluid. Nodular bronchiectasis predominantly affects older women of Caucasian or Asian descent without a history of lung disease.
The second presentation is known as cavitary disease, in which scarring (fibrosis) or cavities form in the lungs (cavitation) particularly in the upper lobes of the lungs. This form is more severe and, if left untreated, can cause progressive cavitation and fibrosis, ultimately resulting in respiratory failure.
There are less common presentations of NTM infection. In some individuals, the disease will present as a single or multiple small masses in the lungs (single or multiple pulmonary nodules) or as hypersensitivity pneumonitis, a condition characterized by inflammation of the lungs after being exposed to NTM. In hypersensitivity pneumonitis cough, fever and shortness of breath are the most common symptoms.
Although pulmonary symptoms are the most common way NTM disease affects humans, these infections can also involve the skin, bones, and lymph nodes. Specific symptoms vary depending on the exact areas of the body affected. An infection can be widespread (disseminated) throughout the body and, without proper treatment, can prove fatal. Disseminated NTM infection occurs almost entirely in individuals whose immune system’s ability to fight infection is severely compromised or absent (immunocompromised individuals).

