Noonan Syndrome with Multiple Lentigines

synonyms:
NSMLmultiple lentigines syndromeLEOPARD syndrome

overview:
Summary

Noonan syndrome with multiple lentigines (NSML) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by abnormalities of the skin, the structure and function of the heart, the inner ear, the head and facial (craniofacial) area, and/or the genitals. In individuals with the disorder, the range and severity of symptoms and physical characteristics may vary from person to person.
LEOPARD is an acronym for the characteristic abnormalities associated with the disorder: L stands for (L)entigines (multiple black or dark brown spots on the skin); (E)lectrocardiographic conduction defects (abnormalities of the electrical activity and the coordination of proper contractions of the heart); (0)cular hypertelorism (widely-spaced eyes); (P)ulmonary stenosis (obstruction of the normal outflow of blood from the right ventricle of the heart); (A)bnormalities of the genitals; (R)etarded growth resulting in short stature; and (D)eafness or hearing loss due to malfunction of the inner ear (sensorineural deafness). Some affected individuals may also exhibit mild intellectual disability, speech difficulties, and/or, in some cases, additional physical abnormalities.
NSML is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder. NSML and Noonan syndrome are both caused by mutations in thePTPN11andRAF1genes.

symptoms:
The symptoms and physical characteristics associated with NSML are highly variable. However, most affected individuals tend to exhibit characteristic abnormalities of the skin, the structure and function of the heart, the head and facial (craniofacial) area, and/or the genitals.
Children with NSML may exhibit numerous black or dark brown “freckle-like” spots on the skin (multiple lentigines). However, most individuals with NSML do not exhibit lentigines during the first few years of life.  Lentigines increase in number with age, usually until puberty. Many affected individuals may exhibit thousands of such lentigines. Although these small, flat discolorations (macules) resemble freckles, they tend to be darker, range from approximately one to five millimeters (mm) in size, and do not darken upon exposure to sunlight. The lentigines tend to be most numerous on the neck and upper chest area (trunk), be less concentrated below the knees, and involve only the skin, not the mucous membranes. However, they may appear anywhere on the skin of the body including the scalp, face, upper arms and/or upper legs, palms of the hands, soles of the feet, and/or genitals. In approximately 20 percent of affected individuals, larger, dark brown discolorations (café-au-lait spots) may also appear on the skin.
Many individuals with NSML also have cardiac anomalies. Such heart defects, which are often apparent during infancy or early childhood, may include the abnormal transmission of electrical impulses that coordinate contractions of the heart (electrocardiographic conduction defects). In many cases of NSML, there may be an interruption of the normal passage of electrical impulses (heart block) through the heart’s conducting system. As a result, although the two upper chambers of the heart (atria) may beat normally, the two lower chambers (ventricles) may contract less often or “fall behind” the atria.
The effects of such electrocardiographic conduction defects in individuals with NSML may be highly variable, ranging from no apparent symptoms (asymptomatic) in some affected individuals to potentially serious complications in others. For example, those who exhibit prolonged P-R intervals may not exhibit any associated symptoms. Observable symptoms may also not occur in affected individuals who experience dropped beats. In more severe cases of heart block, however, if there is inadequate blood output from the ventricles, affected individuals may experience breathlessness due to the heart’s inability to pump blood effectively (heart failure), fatigue, or experience fainting episodes. If the ventricular beat slows dramatically or stops, affected individuals may black out, experience seizures, or exhibit life-threatening symptoms.
In addition, individuals with NSML may also have structural (anatomical) malformations of the heart. The most common cardiac malformation appears to be overgrowth (hypertrophy) of the cardiac muscle in the ventricular wall(s) (hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy), particularly the left ventricle. This condition may cause reduced cardiac output, potentially resulting in fatigue; fainting episodes (syncope), particularly during physical activity; and/or, in some cases, potentially life-threatening symptoms (e.g., arrhythmias, etc.)
The second most common abnormality is the obstruction of the normal outflow of blood from the lower right chamber (ventricle) of the heart to the lungs (isolated valvar pulmonary stenosis). Such obstruction may be due to abnormal narrowing (stenosis) of the pulmonary artery, which carries blood from the right ventricle to the lungs; stenosis of the pulmonary valve, the valve that controls the regular flow of deoxygenated blood through the pulmonary artery and on to the lungs; abnormal narrowing of the upper portion of the right ventricle; and/or other causes. In individuals with pulmonary stenosis, the heart must work harder to send blood to the lungs for oxygenation.
In most individuals with NSML, pulmonary stenosis tends to be mild and symptoms may not occur (asymptomatic). In those cases when symptoms do occur, they often may not appear until later in childhood.
In some people, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and pulmonary stenosis may be associated.
Some affected individuals with pulmonary stenosis may also exhibit abnormal narrowing (stenosis) of the aorta, the main artery of the body. Aortic stenosis may result in obstruction of blood flow from the left ventricle to the aorta and abnormal thickening of cardiac muscle in the wall of the left ventricle. As a result, aortic stenosis may contribute to such symptoms as fatigue, chest pain (angina pectoris) during exertion, breathlessness, and/or fainting episodes.
Many individuals with NSML exhibit widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism), with or without additional malformations of the head and facial (craniofacial) area. These may include a triangular-shaped face, drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis), the presence of abnormal folds of skin over the inner corners of the eye (epicanthal folds), abnormal protrusion of the lower jaw (mandibular prognathism), and/or low-set, unusually prominent ears. Some affected individuals may also exhibit additional abnormalities including crossing of the eyes (strabismus) and/or mild webbing of the neck (pterygium colli).
Many individuals with NSML also have genital abnormalities. Affected males may exhibit abnormal placement of the urinary opening (meatus) on the underside of the penis (hypospadias), unusual smallness of the penis (micropenis), and/or failure of one or both testes to descend into the scrotum (unilateral or bilateral cryptorchidism). Affected females may exhibit underdevelopment (hypoplasia) or absence (agenesis) of an ovary. Abnormally decreased function of the gonads (i.e., testes in males, ovaries in females) may result in delayed development of secondary sexual characteristics (puberty) in some affected males and females.
Individuals with NSML may also exhibit growth retardation that results in short stature. Affected individuals may also have additional skeletal abnormalities. These may include malformations of the chest (thoracic deformity) such as abnormal depression of the bone forming the center of the chest (sternum), known as “funnel chest” or pectus excavatum, or abnormal protrusion of the sternum, known as “keeled chest” or pectus carinatum. Some individuals with NSML may exhibit additional skeletal abnormalities such as unusually prominent shoulder blades (winged scapula), abnormal sideways curvature of the spine (scoliosis), and/or the development of abnormal front-to-back spinal curvature (kyphosis) during later life.
Some individuals with NSML may also exhibit mild to severe hearing loss due to malfunction of the inner ears (sensorineural deafness). In some people, such hearing loss may be apparent at birth or during early childhood. However, other affected individuals may have normal hearing in early childhood yet eventually exhibit hearing loss at a later age. Hearing impairment may contribute to speech difficulties in many people. Although most affected individuals have normal intelligence, others may exhibit mild intellectual disability.

