Norrie Disease

synonyms:
atrophia bulborum hereditariaEpiskopi blindnessNDNDP (Norrie disease pseudoglioma)Norrie syndromeNorrie-Warburg disease

overview:
Summary
Norrie disease is characterized by vision loss at birth or a few weeks after an eye lesion such as retinal detachment occurs which threatens vision and can lead to severe visual impairment or loss of vision. Norrie disease mostly occurs in males, but females can show milder symptoms. Norrie disease is progressive through childhood and adolescence. Additional symptoms may occur in some people, although this varies even among individuals in the same family. Most affected males develop hearing loss which is progressive over many years. Some may exhibit cognitive abnormalities such as developmental delays, intellectual disabilities or behavioral issues.
Norrie disease is a rare X-linked genetic disorder that occurs due to change (mutation) in theNDPgene.NDPgene mutations are associated with a spectrum of retinopathies and Norrie disease is the most severe. Less severe retinopathies that can be caused byNDPgene mutations include persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV), X-linked familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (X-linked-FEVR), and some cases of retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) and Coats disease The ocular manifestations may vary between individuals even within a family.
Introduction
Norrie Disease was thought to have first been reported in Denmark in 1927 when Norrie, a Danish ophthalmologist, surveyed the cause of blindness in Denmark and found a disease that only affected males and occurred in several generations. The records were later reviewed by Mete Warburg and the name Norrie was proposed.

symptoms:
The main symptom of Norrie disease is a retinal degeneration which occurs before birth and results in blindness at birth (congenital) or early infancy, usually by 3 months of age. Visual failure in this disorder is characterized by the abnormal development of the neuroretina, the thin layer of nerve cells that lines the back of the eyes. The neuroretina senses light and converts it into nerve signals, which are then relayed to brain through the optic nerve.
In Norrie disease, the retinas separate from the underlying, supporting tissue (retinal detachment). This causes a grayish-yellow mass to develop in the back of the eye behind the lens that may be mistaken for a tumor (pseudoglioma). This mass consists of immature retinal cells and may be apparent a few days after birth or may not be noted until weeks or months later. This mass is located behind the lens of the eyes so that in some, instant illumination the pupils appear white, a condition known as leukocoria or “cat’s eye” reflex.
The eyes of affected children go through additional progressive changes. The lenses of the eyes of an affected infant may be initially clear. Eventually, clouding (opacity) lens through which light passes may develop, a condition known as a cataract. In addition, as the disorder progresses, shrinking of the eyeball (phthisis bulbi) may occur and is often apparent by ten years of age. Subsequently, the lenses are often completely obscured by cataracts.
In addition, the eyes may be abnormally small (microphthalmia) at birth, the pupils may be widened (dilated) and the colored portion of the eyes (irises) may be underdeveloped (hypoplasia) and may stick to the lens (posterior synechiae) or to the cornea (anterior synechiae). The space in the eye behind the cornea and in front of the iris (anterior chamber) may be abnormally shallow and the outflow tracts of the eye may be blocked (occluded), resulting in increased pressure within the eye (intraocular pressure) which may be extremely painful. Other signs of Norrie disease that occur in 80%-99% of individuals with this condition can be found in the facial features. These include abnormally close eyes (hypotelorism), deeply set eyes, a narrow nasal bridge, and larger than normal ears (macrotia).
Most individuals with Norrie disease develop progressive hearing loss due to vascular abnormalities in the cochlea (inner ear). Hearing loss usually begins in early childhood and may be mild at first and slowly progressive. By the third or fourth decade there may be significant functional loss but can usually be aide assisted. Speech discrimination is relatively well preserved. The development and severity of hearing loss varies greatly even among members of the same family. In some patients, hearing loss may not develop until adulthood.
Approximately 30-50 percent of individuals with Norrie disease may experience cognitive abnormalities including delays in reaching developmental milestones disproportional to vision loss. Patients could also show behavioral problems including psychosis, aggressive behavior and cognitive regression. Intellectual disabilities have been reported in 20-30% of patients. Dementia is rare but may occur in late adulthood.
Norrie disease has been associated with disease of the peripheral blood vessels in some people. Patients have been reported with venous stasis ulcers. In more complex molecular genetic cases (NDPgene deletion), other clinical features may occur including seizures, growth failure and endocrine abnormalities.

