NORSE (New Onset Refractory Status Epilepticus) and FIRES (Febrile Infection-Related Epilepsy Syndrome)

overview:
Definitions and Summary
New-onset refractory status epilepticus (NORSE) is defined as a condition, not a specific diagnosis, with new onset of refractory status epilepticus without a clear acute or active structural, toxic or metabolic cause in a patient without active epilepsy. Status epilepticus (SE) is a condition of prolonged seizure activity or repeated seizures without full recovery in between. Status epilepticus that persists despite at least two standard anti-seizure medications is termed refractory status epilepticus (RSE). Most of the common causes of RSE can be identified within 24-72 hours of presentation.
Febrile infection-related epilepsy syndrome (FIRES) is a subcategory of NORSE that requires a prior febrile infection starting between 2 weeks and 24 hours prior to onset of refractory status epilepticus, with or without fever at onset of status epilepticus.
In up to half of the cases of NORSE, a possible or probable cause is ultimately found, most often autoimmune or paraneoplastic encephalitis, with infectious causes less common. In the remaining half or more, no cause is identified despite an extensive work-up. These cases are referred to as cryptogenic NORSE or NORSE of unknown etiology. In cryptogenic cases, and likely in other cases, seizures are thought to be caused or exacerbated by an excess of pro-inflammatory molecules in the brain, perhaps triggered by a typical minor infection in a susceptible individual, although no clear cause—or even risk factor–has been demonstrated. Affected individuals are most often treated for weeks in an intensive care unit because they require prolonged anesthesia with coma-inducing drugs to control their seizures. NORSE carries a high rate of complications and mortality, but a significant proportion of patients do eventually recover. Epilepsy (a life-long predisposition to unprovoked seizures), cognitive and psychological issues are common among survivors although a minority of them eventually return to a normal lifestyle.
Introduction
Status epilepticus (SE) is defined as a prolonged seizure (>5 minutes if convulsive, >10 minutes if not) or a cluster of seizures without recovery in between. Status epilepticus that persists despite administration of at least two appropriately selected and dosed parenteral medications is termed refractory status epilepticus (RSE). Most of the causes of RSE can be identified within 24-72 hours of presentation, as it is commonly due to an obvious acute brain injury (stroke, trauma, etc.) or serious acute medical illness. RSE may also occur in people with epilepsy (also known as a seizure disorder). In a substantial minority of cases, however, RSE strikes out of the blue without a clear acute or active structural, toxic or metabolic cause, in a healthy patient without active epilepsy. These cases are known as new-onset refractory status epilepticus, or NORSE. In half of the cases, a cause is ultimately identified, most often autoimmune or paraneoplastic, followed by infections (mostly viral, although mycoplasma is not rare). In the remaining half or more, however, no cause is identified despite an extensive work-up. These cases are referred to as cryptogenic NORSE or NORSE of unknown etiology.
Febrile infection-related epilepsy syndrome (FIRES) is a subtype of NORSE preceded by a febrile infection, with fever starting between 2 weeks and 24 hours prior to onset of refractory status epilepticus. Fever may or may not be present at the time of onset of status epilepticus. The syndrome has been mostly described in school-aged children but occurs in adults as well. Previously, the term FIRES was only used in the pediatric population while NORSE was mainly used in adults. According to recent consensus definitions, FIRES is now considered a subtype of NORSE and both conditions now have no age limits. Children can have NORSE and adults can have FIRES. Everyone with FIRES also has NORSE, by definition. The distinguishing feature of FIRES is the preceding fever. Although the term NORSE includes the subcategory of FIRES, both terms are used here because the recent integration of the two disorders is still being disseminated in the literature and public.

symptoms:
In two-thirds of NORSE cases, the course of the syndrome begins with a mild febrile illness, associated with malaise, fatigue and symptoms of upper respiratory tract or gastro-intestinal tract infection. Symptoms of meningeal inflammation, such as headache and photophobia, are uncommon. Behavioral and cognitive symptoms, such as apathy or agitation, amnesia, and sometimes hallucinations can be observed. The presence of hallucinations may suggest an autoimmune etiology, especially anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis.
This initial phase lasts a few days to a week or two and is followed by the progressive onset of seizures. Both focal seizures with impaired awareness (previously known as complex partial seizures, and typically described as staring episodes) and bilateral tonic-clonic seizures (often referred to as “grand mal” in non-medical terms) can occur. They are initially intermittent but become increasingly more frequent and the patient’s consciousness declines as he/she transitions into status epilepticus.
This acute phase usually lasts days to several weeks and in some cases can even last several months. During this phase, the patient remains comatose due to the effect of the seizures and anesthetic treatment and can develop any of the complications associated with prolonged unconsciousness and mechanical ventilation. The mortality rate reaches 30% and is higher in adults than children.
Once SE is controlled and anesthetic treatment is discontinued, the patients progressively regain consciousness and can be discharged from the ICU and the hospital. At least one half of the surviving patients are left with long-term cognitive and functional disability and many will have epilepsy, requiring prolonged (or lifelong) treatment with anti-seizure medications. A small minority, however, will be able to resume their previously normal lifestyle.
The infantile hemiconvulsion‐hemiplegia and epilepsy syndrome (IHHE) is a specific syndrome that also qualifies as NORSE. IHHE occurs in a patient <2 years old, presenting as NORSE with unilateral motor seizures, high‐grade fever persisting at the time of onset of refractory status epilepticus, and unilaterally abnormal acute imaging, followed by hemiparesis lasting at least 24 hours, and excluding definite infectious encephalitis.

