Ocular Albinism with Late Onset Sensorineural Deafness

synonyms:
OASDocular albinism with sensorineural deafnessdeafness and ocular albinism

overview:
Ocular albinism with late onset sensorineural deafness (OASD) is a rare inherited subtype of ocular albinism.
It is characterized by vision abnormalities, translucent blue eye color and moderate to severe deafness. Similar to ocular albinism, vision impairment is present at birth and remains stable throughout life. However, hearing difficulty arises later in life from adolescence to the fourth or fifth decade.
This condition is thought to be caused by changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in theGPR143gene (also known as theOA1gene) or by variants in other genes located in the same region of the X chromosome. OASD is inherited in an X-linked pattern.

symptoms:
The main symptoms include ocular albinism and deafness. Albinism refers to lack of melanin synthesis, or the pigment of skin, eyes and hair.
In ocular albinism, only the eyes (iris, retina) are affected, not the skin or hair. This leads to translucent blue eyes and other vision abnormalities. In the back of the eye, there is a layer called the retina, which is made up of photoreceptor cells responsible for capturing light and transmitting it into electrical and chemical signals for the brain to interpret into an image. In ocular albinism, this retina layer lacks pigment which leads to hypersensitivity to light (photophobia) and an abnormal connection between the retina and the optic nerve that travels to the brain.
There are two types of deafness, sensorineural and conductive. Conductive deafness refers to blockage of the outer or middle ear in which sound cannot efficiently pass through to the inner ear, whereas sensorineural deafness refers to the hearing loss in the inner ear, usually affecting the nerves of the cochlea (spiral-shaped cavity).
The signs and symptoms of OSAD reported in the medical literature include:
· Eye and vision abnormalities due to the abnormal connection between the retina and the optic nerve such as crossed eyes (strabismus), rapid involuntary eye movements (nystagmus) and blurred vision (decreased visual acuity)
· Sensorineural deafness beginning in adolescence to the fourth or fifth decade of life

