Oculo-Auriculo-Vertebral Spectrum

synonyms:
Facio-Auriculo-Vertebral SpectrumFAVFirst and Second Branchial Arch SyndromeGoldenhar-Gorlin SyndromeOAVSOAV SpectrumOculo-Auriculo-Vertebral Dysplasia

overview:
Oculo-auriculo-vertebral spectrum (OAVS) refers to three rare disorders that many clinicians believe to be intimately related to one another and which represent the range of severity of the same disorder. These disorders are apparent at birth (congenital). As the name suggests, they involve malformations of the eyes, ears and spine.
Oculo-auriculo-vertebral disorder (OAVD) represents the mildest form of the disorder, while Goldenhar syndrome presents frequently as the most severe form. Hemifacial microstomia appears to be an intermediate form.
The disorder is characterized by a wide spectrum of symptoms and physical features that may vary greatly in range and severity from case to case. However, such abnormalities tend to involve the cheekbones, jaw, mouth, ears, eyes, and/or bones of the spinal column (vertebrae). Although, in most cases (about 60%), such malformations affect one side of the body (unilateral), approximately 10 to 33 percent of affected individuals have such malformations on both sides of the body (bilateral), with one side typically more affected than the other (asymmetry). In the majority of such cases, the right side is more severely affected than the left.
In most cases OAVS appears to occur randomly, with no apparent cause (sporadic). However, in some cases, family histories suggest autosomal dominant or recessive inheritance. In addition, some researchers suggest that the disorder may be caused by the interaction of many genes, possibly in combination with environmental factors (multifactorial inheritance).

symptoms:
Oculo-auriculo-vertebral spectrum represents three rare disorders that are apparent at birth (congenital), and are characterized by a wide spectrum of symptoms and physical features that may vary greatly in range and severity from case to case.  However, such abnormalities tend to involve the cheekbones, jaws, mouth, ears, eyes, and/or bones of the spinal column (vertebrae).  In about 60 percent of the cases, such malformations involve one side of the body (unilateral).  Yet, in approximately 10 to 33 percent of affected individuals, both sides of the body may be involved (bilateral), with one side usually more affected than the other (asymmetry).  In many such cases, the right side is more severely affected than the left.
For unknown reasons, hemifacial microsomia (HFM) tends to affect only the right side of the face.  IN HFM, both the jaw and the eye may be substantially smaller on the affected side.  The cheek on the affected side may appear to be flatter due to under development of the cheekbones on that side.  The external ear may be smaller (microtia) or even absent (anotia).  There may also be hearing loss.  Intelligence is not affected.
People with the Goldenhar variant of OAVS present with most if not all of the signs of HFM, but in 10 to 33 percent of the cases, the symptoms affect both sides of the face (bilateral).  A cleft lip and/or cleft palate may be present but the presence of a cleft palate alone is more common.  The muscles of the tongue and cheeks may cause severe difficulties with speech.  Some tissue(s) of the eye may fail to close, presenting as a notch (coloboma) of varying size.  In about one-third of cases, the patient presents with a cyst on the eye (dermoids cyst).  Further, patients with Goldenhar syndrome can present with heart defects as well as kidney problems.  People with Goldenhar syndrome may have underdeveloped kidneys on one side or even the lack of a kidney on the affected side.  Two or more vertebrae may be fused or knitted together. Intelligence is not affected.

