Oculocutaneous Albinism

synonyms:
brown oculocutaneous albinismminimal pigment oculocutaneous albinismOCA1OCA1AOCA1BOCA3OCA4oculocutaneous albinism type 1Bplatinum oculocutaneous albinismrufous oculocutaneous albinismtemperature-sensitive oculocutaneous albinismtyrosinase-negative oculocutaneous albinismtyrosinase-positive oculocutaneous albinismtyrosinase-related OCAyellow oculocutaneous albinismOCA5OCA6OCA7oculocutaneous albinism type 1A

overview:
Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is a group of rare inherited disorders characterized by a reduction or complete lack of melanin pigment in the skin, hair and eyes. These conditions are caused by mutations in specific genes that are necessary for the production of melanin pigment in specialized cells called melanocytes. Absent or insufficient melanin pigment results in abnormal development of the eyes, resulting in vision abnormalities, and light skin that is very susceptible to damage from the sun including skin cancer. Visual changes include nystagmus (involuntary side to side eye movement), strabismus and photophobia (sensitivity to light). Other changes include foveal hypoplasia (which affects visual acuity) and mis-routing of the optic nerves. All individuals with OCA have the above visual changes but the amount of skin, hair and iris pigment can vary depending on the gene (or type of OCA) and mutation involved.
There are seven types of OCA (OCA1-7) caused by mutations in seven different genes. Oculocutaneous albinism is inherited as an autosomal recessive genetic condition.

symptoms:
Several vision problems can occur with this condition including an involuntary movement of eyes back and forth (nystagmus), reduced iris pigment (iris transillumination), reduced retinal pigment, lack of development of the macula (macular hypoplasia) resulting in abnormal foveal development (the area of the eye responsible for visual acuity), poor visual acuity, and abnormal connections in the nerves from the retina to the brain that prevents the eyes from tracking together (strabismus) and reduces depth perception. Visual acuity in individuals can range from 20/60 to 20/400, usually depending on the amount of pigment present in the eye. Vision acuity is usually better in those individuals with greater amounts of pigment.
Oculocutaneous albinism type 2 (OCA2) is associated with the same vision problems that occur in OCA1. Individuals with OCA2 have a wide range of skin pigmentation that is partially dependent on their genetic background and the mutations present. Hair color is usually not completely white and there can be some pigment present in the skin but skin color is usually lighter than in unaffected relatives. Individuals with extensive sun exposure can develop pigmented nevi and lentigines. This does not occur with other types of OCA. A reduction in skin pigment is apparent in Africans and African-Americans but skin coloration appears close to normal in other populations with normally lighter pigmentation but affected individuals do not tan. Brown OCA is a type of OCA2 where hair and skin coloration is darker. This type of OCA2 has only been reported in individuals with African ancestry. OCA2 is associated with mutations in the OCA2 gene, formerly called the P gene.
Oculocutaneous albinism type 3 (OCA3) was initially described in the African population. Affected individuals have red to reddish-brown skin, ginger or reddish hair, and hazel or brown eyes and the condition was initially termed rufous albinism. OCA3 has now been identified in several additional populations especially of Asian descent including Chinese and Japanese, as well as in Asian Indian and Northern European individuals. Affected individuals of Asian heritage can have blond hair with light brown eyebrows with skin lighter than their parents. Both hair and skin pigmentation increases with age. Vision problems are not as severe as OCA1 or OCA2. Nystagmus and photophobia may not be present. OCA3 is associated with mutations in the tyrosinase related protein 1 (TYRP1) gene.
Oculocutaneous albinism type 4 (OCA4) is characterized by physical features that are similar to those of OCA2. Hair color of affected individuals can range from yellow to brown. Visual acuity can range from 20/30 to 20/400 depending on the amount of pigment that is present, but acuity is usually in the range of 20/100 to 20/200. Vision is usually stable after childhood. OCA4 was initially identified in an individual of Turkish origin and has been found in Asian populations including Japanese and Korean and German individuals, OCA4 is associated with mutations in the SLC45A2 gene (formerly called MATP), a membrane-associated transport protein.

