Ocular Motor Apraxia, Cogan Type

synonyms:
COMACongenital Oculomotor Apraxiaoculomotor apraxia, Cogan typesaccade initiation failure, congenital

symptoms:
Cogan type ocular motor apraxia is a rare congenital disorder characterized by a defect in side-to-side (horizontal) eye movements.  The eyes do not move properly in response to stimuli or voluntarily.  When affected infants are asked to fixate on an object to the side, their eyes will lag and then move in the opposite direction.  In order to compensate for this, the infants will sharply jerk their heads past the desired object in an effort to bring the eyes to a position where they can view the object.  When the eyes fixate on the object, the head will return to its normal position.  These jerking head movements are the most noticeable sign of Cogan type ocular motor apraxia and are usually recognized three to four months after birth.  Before these head jerkings occur, an infant’s inability to fixate on an object may sometimes be mistaken for blindness.
Infants with Cogan type ocular motor apraxia will also be unable to follow rapid movements across their fields of vision, such as focusing on a moving train (opticokinetic nystagmus).  The disorder can also be associated with mild developmental delay and speech difficulties.
In other rare cases of Cogan type ocular motor apraxia, individuals exhibit an inability to fixate on objects to one particular side of the body (unilateral ocular motor apraxia).  In some of these cases, individuals may demonstrate improper eye movements and/or an inability to track an object with the other eye.
Cogan type ocular motor apraxia is not progressive and many affected individuals eventually learn to compensate for the disorder by overshooting the eyes instead of jerking the head.  The number and severity of symptoms varies widely among affected individuals.
Some individuals with Cogan type ocular motor apraxia have a brain abnormality such as underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the corpus callosum, hypoplasia of the cerebellum, or an abnormality in the grey matter.  (For more information on agenesis of corpus callosum, see the Related Disorders section of this report.)

