Ogden Syndrome

synonyms:
NAA10-related neurodevelopmental syndrome

overview:
Summary
Ogden syndrome is a rare genetic condition characterized by a spectrum of clinical features, including facial differences, aged appearance, developmental disabilities, skeletal anomalies, genitourinary anomalies, irregular heartbeat (cardiac arrhythmia) and other conditions. Ogden syndrome is an X-linked genetic condition caused by disease-causing (pathogenic) variants in theNAA10gene. Treatment for this condition is based on the individual’s symptoms.
Introduction
The name Ogden syndrome was suggested by the first family identified with the condition, in honor of their hometown. The syndrome was first described in 2011 by Dr. Gholson Lyon, who cared for the family and obtained DNA samples to identify the genetic cause. Originally, Ogden syndrome was thought to affect males only, with severe, often fatal health problems. Ogden syndrome is now known to have a range of mild to severe symptoms and can also affect females. This condition is also known asNAA10-related neurodevelopmental syndrome. In this report, Ogden syndrome refers to the wide spectrum of features associated with a disease-causing variant in theNAA10gene.

symptoms:
Individuals with Ogden syndrome present at different ages and with a wide spectrum of symptoms and severity. Males with Ogden syndrome tend to be affected more severely and may have life-threatening symptoms in infancy. Females with one disease-causing variant in theNAA10gene can vary from having no symptoms to having the same features as an affected male.
Ogden syndrome can affect several organ systems and include a variety of symptoms such as:
Facial:Common features include large spaces between the bones of the skull, wrinkled forehead, prominent eyes, hypertelorism or widely spaced eyes, thick eyebrows, long eyelashes, relatively large ears, flared or prominent nostrils, upturned nose, protruding upper lip, small jaw or micrognathia, narrow palate and small hands and feet.
Heart:Some individuals have heart abnormalities including prolonged QT intervals that cause irregular heart rhythm or heart defects such as atrial septal defects and ventricular septal defects. Heart issues may be present at different ages. However features such as issues with the heart rate or rhythm also known as cardiac arrhythmias or congenital heart defects, can be identified prenatally.
Respiratory:There have been a few reports in the medical literature of respiratory issues. These include respiratory distress in infancy, pneumonia or frequent respiratory infections, apnea, pulmonary hypertension and bronchiolitis.
Gastrointestinal:Most individuals with Ogden syndrome have feeding difficulties during infancy. Other gastrointestinal problems may include difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), aspiration issues, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), vomiting, constipation and diarrhea. Some individuals have been reported to need a feeding tube.
Genitourinary:Over half of the affected males have genitourinary malformations including inguinal hernia, small testes and undescended testes (cryptorchidism). Less frequently, there have been reports of cystic renal dysplasia that can block urine flow and scar tissue in the kidneys (glomerulosclerosis).
Growth:Affected individuals may be short for their height, have low weight and have smaller head circumference in the first year of life. There have also been some reports of low muscle tone (hypotonia) or muscle weakness.
Neurological and Brian:Some Individuals may have brain abnormalities at birth such as a thin or smaller corpus callosum in the brain and a small head size (microcephaly). Other findings include enlarged spaces or ventricles of the brain, abnormal brain development and an injury to the brain’s white matter known as periventricular leukomalacia. Tonic-clonic seizures are also a common feature.
Cognitive and Psychiatric:Some individuals have global developmental delays, speech delays, learning difficulties, autism spectrum disorder (ASD), intellectual disability that varies from mild to severe and behavioral disorders including short attention span, hyperactivity, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), unmotivated laughter, harming behaviors (self and others), self-hugging, and compulsive and obsessive behaviors.
Skeletal and Skin:Skeletal features such as late closure of the space between the bones of the skull, a short neck, scoliosis, chest wall deformities, curved fingers, hip dysplasia, rotated foot and large or broad big toes may be present. Many children also have impaired motor skills and as a result, may have difficulty walking or may be wheelchair-bound. Individuals may have skin laxity, recurrent eczema, vascular anomalies and fine scalp or eyebrow hair.
Eyes and Vision:Most individuals with Ogden syndrome have vision abnormalities. Common features include astigmatism, myopia, strabismus and visual impairment.

