Ogilvie syndrome

synonyms:
ACPOacute colonic pseudo-obstructioncolonic pseudo-obstructionOgilvie's syndrome

overview:
Summary
Ogilvie syndrome is a rare, acquired disorder characterized by abnormalities affecting the involuntary, rhythmic muscular contractions (peristalsis) within the colon. Peristalsis propels food and other material through the digestive system through the coordination of muscles, nerves and hormones. The colon is often significantly widened (dilated). Symptoms are similar to other forms of intestinal pseudo-obstruction and can include nausea, vomiting, abdominal bloating or swelling and constipation. The symptoms of Ogilvie syndrome mimic those of mechanical obstruction of the colon, but no such physical obstruction is present. Mechanical obstruction refers to something (e.g., tumor, scar tissue, etc.) physically blocking the passage of food and other material through the GI tract. Ogilvie syndrome is usually associated with an underlying disorder, trauma or surgery. Ogilvie syndrome can be managed with conservative treatment, but if unrecognized and untreated can lead to serious, potentially life-threatening complications.
Introduction
Ogilvie syndrome was first described in the medical literature in 1948 by a British surgeon named Sir William Ogilvie. The disorder is also known as acute colonic pseudo-obstruction (ACPO). It is not the same as chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction, a similar, but distinct disorder.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of Ogilvie syndrome can vary greatly from one person to another. Ogilvie syndrome can potentially cause serious, life-threatening complications. The disorder most often occurs in hospitalized or institutionalized patients who have an underlying illness or have recently undergone surgery.
Common symptoms of Ogilvie syndrome include abdominal swelling (distention) and bloating, abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting. Some individuals have a history of chronic, sometimes severe constipation. Abdominal distention usually develops over several days, but can potentially develop rapidly within a 24-hour period. Colonic distention can be massive. Additional symptoms that can occur including fever, marked abdominal tenderness and an abnormal increase in the number of white blood cells (leukocytosis) often due to infection. Fever, marked abdominal tenderness, and leukocytosis are more common individuals with perforation or ischemia, but can occur in the absence of these conditions.
Distention of the colon in Ogilvie syndrome can potentially lead to serious, life-threatening complications including the formation of a hole in the wall of the colon (perforation) or lack of blood flow (ischemia) to the colon. Perforation may allow the contents of the colon to spill out into the abdominal cavity. A perforated bowel can cause intense abdominal pain, fever, and sepsis, a severe blood infection. The cecum, the large pouch that marks the beginning of the large intestines, is the area most often where the greatest dilation occurs and consequently is most at risk of perforation. Perforation in Ogilvie syndrome is rare developing in only 1-3 percent of affected individuals.
Ischemic bowel results in tissue damage or death in the affected portion of the bowel. Individuals with a perforated or ischemic bowel have a greater incidence of fever and may have signs of inflammation of the peritoneum (peritonitis). The peritoneum is the thin tissue that lines the inside of the abdominal wall and covers most of the abdominal organs.

