Olivopontocerebellar Atrophy

overview:
The term olivopontocerebellar atrophy (OPCA) has historically been used to describe a group of disorders that affect the central nervous system and are termed neurodegenerative diseases because they result in a progressive deterioration of nerve cells in certain parts of the brain. These conditions are characterized by progressive balance problems (disequilibrium), progressive impairment of the ability to coordinate voluntary movements (cerebellar ataxia), and difficulty speaking or slurred speech (dysarthria).
OPCA has been classified based on clinical, genetic, and neuropathological findings and there is significant controversy and confusion in the medical literature because of its association with two distinct groups of disorders, specifically multiple system atrophy (MSA) and spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA). Hereditary OPCA usually refers to the group of disorders that overlap with SCA. These conditions are discussed in detail in the NORD report on autosomal dominant hereditary ataxias. Sporadic OPCA refers to the group of disorders for which there is not yet evidence of a hereditary component. Some individuals with sporadic OPCA will develop MSA and this disorder is discussed in detail in the NORD report on MSA. In addition, there are rare types of OPCA that follow autosomal recessive inheritance including Fickler-Winkler type OPCA and the pontocerebellar hypoplasia conditions. One type of SCA follows X-linked inheritance. Currently, neurologists usually use the term OPCA as a preliminary diagnosis until a more specific diagnosis can be made with genetic testing or by ruling out other conditions.

symptoms:
Among the different classifications, there is wide variation in severity and age of onset. The symptoms of OPCA differ from person to person. Most patients experience difficulty with balance and coordination of the legs and arms (ataxia) and slurred speech (dysarthria). Other symptoms may include muscle spasms or weakness and stiffness of the muscles; numbness or tingling of the hands or feet; shaking (tremor) of the hand or arm; reduction or slowness of movements; loss of thinking and/or memory skills; difficulty controlling the bladder or bowels; and feeling faint when standing up. Some patients also have fatigue and/or trouble with sleep. Generally, symptoms of OPCA begin in mid-adult life and progress slowly over the course of many years.
OPCA is characterized by progressive degeneration of certain structures of the brain, especially the cerebellum, pons, and inferior olivae. The cerebellum is the part of the brain that plays a role in maintaining balance and posture as well as coordinating voluntary movement. The pons is part of the brainstem and contains important neuronal pathways between the cerebrum, spinal cord, and cerebellum. The pons serves as a relay point for messages between these structures. The inferior olivae are two round structures that contain nuclei that are involved with balance, coordination and motor activity.

