Oral-Facial-Digital Syndrome

synonyms:
OFD syndromeorofaciodigital syndrome

overview:
Oral-facial-digital syndrome (OFDS) is a group of conditions that affect the development of their oral cavity (mouth, tongue, teeth, and jaw), face (head, eyes and nose) and finger and toes (digits).
Common signs and symptoms include a split (cleft) in the lip and a tongue with an unusual lobed shape. There may also be growth of noncancerous tumors or nodules on the tongue. Affected people may have extra, missing, or differently shaped teeth. Another common feature is an opening in the roof of the mouth (cleft palate). Some people with OFDS have bands of extra tissue (gingival frenula) that attach the lip to the gums. Distinct facial features include a wide nose with a broad, flat nasal bridge and widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism). Fusion of certain digits (syndactyly), short digits (brachydactyly), curved digits (clinodactyly) or extra fingers/toes (polydactyly) are commonly seen in OFDS. People with OFDS also have issues with the development and structure of the brain. Mild to severe intellectual disability is seen in affected people.
There are 14 different types of OFDS, some of which are not well-defined. The signs and symptoms vary widely, making diagnosis difficult. OFDS type I is the most common, but all the OFDS types are very rare. Depending on the type of OFDS there can be other features related with the condition. For example, polycystic kidney disease, seizures, heart defects and distinct skeletal features.
Treatment is mainly supportive and depends on the signs and symptoms seen in each person.

Introduction
OFDS type I was first reported by Papillon-Leage and Psaume in 1954 and further defined by Gorlin and Psaume in 1962. The first person with this condition was reported in 1941. Since then a number of different OFDS types with overlapping signs and symptoms have been described. The gene responsible for causing OFDS type I was identified in 2001 and for a while remained the only OFD gene known. In the last few years, a number of genes responsible for other types of OFDS have been identified.

symptoms:
The various types of OFDS present with some combination of signs and symptoms from the list below.
Face and skin: Eyes set widely apart (hypertelorism), small eyes; eyes looking in different directions (strabismus), a small jaw, a loss of hair (alopecia), abnormalities in the structure of the nostrils; broad nose at the base and/or tip; one nostril smaller than the other; angled ears
Oral cavity: split in the lip (cleft lip); opening in the roof of the mouth (cleft palate); lobed or split tongue; tumors of the tongue; extra or missing teeth; smaller than usual jaw; over, under, or lateral bite; bands of extra tissue (gingival frenula) that attach the lip to the gums.
Fingers and Toes features: Extra fingers and/or toes (polydactyly); fused fingers (syndactyly), unusually short fingers (brachydactyly); webbed toes and/or fingers; clubfoot; rigid, bent fingers (clinodactyly)
Intellectual and central nervous system (CNS) problems: Intellectual disability of varying degrees; brain abnormalities; seizures; spastic movement and/or tics; delayed development of speech and motor control
Other: Reduction in growth; heart and kidney problems; sunken chest; vulnerability to respiratory infection
Characteristics associated with specific types of oral-facial-digital syndrome are described below.
OFDS type I disease (Papillon-Leage-Psaume syndrome)
OFDS type I is marked by coarse thin hair, grainy skin lesions (milia) on the face, and extra fingers on one hand (polysyndactyly). Polycystic kidney disease (PKD) is seen in around 50% of patients. PKD may not be seen until the affected person is a teenager.
Oral issues include: clefting of the hard or soft palate, cleft lip, tumors or nodules of the tongue, missing or extra teeth, multiple bands of extra tissue that abnormally attach the lip to the gums (gingival frenulae) and other dental issues. Facial features include widely spaced eyes, broad nasal bridge, small jaw and differently shaped nostrils. Issues with digits affecting the hands more often than the feet. These include short fingers (brachydactyly), fused fingers (syndactyly), bent fingers (clinodactyly) especially the fifth finger and extra fingers or toes (polydactyly).
Adult-onset polycystic kidney disease (PKD) leading to kidney failure is a distinct feature of OFDS type 1. It can be the presenting feature in females with mild signs and symptoms. PKD can lead to end-stage renal disease (ESRD). Central nervous system involvement includes brain malformations. People with OFDS type I have varying degrees of intellectual disability. The condition is mostly lethal in males due to its mode of inheritance. However, a few male patients have been reported. The males had chronic kidney diseases leading to ESRD, but with varying degrees of other oral-facial and digital defects and central nervous system involvement. Signs and symptoms of OFDS type I can vary within and between families.
OFDS type II disease (Mohr syndrome)
Has the same set of symptoms as those of Type I. It may also include the presence of extra toes on both feet (polydactyly) and the nose being split into two parts (bifid nose).  Affected people do not have milia or polycystic kidney disease. They have thick hair and rarely have heart problems; cysts or cavities in the brain (porencephaly) or build-up of fluid in the brain (hydrocephaly).
OFDS type III (Sugarman syndrome)
Is characterized by seesaw winking in which the eye blinks (winks) as the jaw moves. Other features seen are extra fingers or toes (polydactyly), epilepsy-like myoclonic jerks, and profound intellectual disability. Some affected people have extra teeth, low-set ears, and broad tip of the nose. End stage kidney failure can occur in the teens and 20s.
OFDS type IV (Baraister-Burn syndrome)
Can be told apart from other types of OFDS by short tibias (bone in the leg, connecting the knee to the ankle) which leads to short limbs. An affected person’s chest may be sunken in. Kidney (renal) cysts, low-set ears and small jaw have been seen in people with OFDS type IV.
OFDS type V (Thurston syndrome)
Is marked by a midline cleft lip and extra fingers and toes (polydactyly) only. Bands of extra tissue that attach the lip to the gums (gingival frenulae) have been reported rarely. This type of OFDS has been seen mostly in people of Indian ancestry.
OFDS type VI (Varadi syndrome)
Is marked by extra toes and fingers. The extra digits are usually located between the second and third digits (central polydactyly). The kidney may be smaller than normal or even absent (renal agenesis/ renal dysplasia). Abnormal brain MRI results showing a molar tooth sign have been noted for people with OFDS type VI.  Affected people may have varying degrees of intellectual disability.
OFDS type VII (Whelan syndrome)
Is the same as type I. OFDS type VII has been shown to be due to changes (mutations) in OFD1 gene and is no longer considered a separate type.
OFDS type VIII (Edwards syndrome)
Is characterized by extra fingers and toes (polydactyly) and shortening of some long bones of the arm (radius) and leg (tibia). It is also characterized by issues in the structure of the epiglottis (flap in the throat that prevents food from entering the windpipe and the lungs while swallowing). Other features include a midline cleft lip, large nose and the thumb being split into two (bifid thumb).
OFDS type IX (Gurrieri syndrome)
Clinical features include abnormal development of the retina, and cleft lip (usually lateral/located on the sides of the mouth). Affected people may have one eyeball smaller than the other, short stature, nodules on the tongue, and cleft palate. Heart problems like a hole in the heart (septal defects) have been reported.
OFDS type X (Figuera syndrome)
Common features include cleft palate, flat nasal bridge and gingival frenulae. The lower jaw is set behind the upper jaw (retrognathia) for some affected people.  It is marked by the shortening of some long bones of the arm (radius) and the absence of the smaller bone of the lower leg (agenesis of the fibula). Other features seen are the presence of fewer than five fingers or toes on a hand or foot (oligodactyly).
OFDS XI (Gabrielli syndrome/Toriello syndrome)
Is characterized by incomplete or underdevelopment of the odontoid (tooth-like bony structure in the upper spine) and other defects in the spine. Other features seen are enlargement of the ventricles of the brain (ventriculomegaly), small holes near the ears (auricular pits) and underdeveloped eyelids causing them to not open as far as usual (blepharophimosis). Deafness, severe intellectual disability, and behavioural problems have also been seen.
OFDS XII (Moran-Barroso syndrome)
Has been described in only one person who had several malformations of the brain and shortening of the long bone of the leg (tibia). They were also noted to have extra teeth, tongue with a groove, or split (bifid tongue) and a large head (macrocephaly). Along with club feet and extra toes and fingers (polydactyly).
OFDS XIII (Degner syndrome)
Has also been reported in one person. Features include psychiatric issues and epilepsy. Abnormal MRI results showing changes in the appearance of the white matter of the brain (leukokaraiosis) have been seen. The affected person also had tumors of the tongue, cleft lip, and short, bent, and fused fingers (syndactyly).
OFDS type XIV
Includes small size of the head (microcephaly) and intellectual disability. Affected people have abnormal brain MRI results showing a molar tooth sign. Small size of the penis (micropenis) and other common oral features of OFDS have also been seen.

