Organizing Pneumonia

synonyms:
Epler's pneumoniabronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP)cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP)idiopathic organizing pneumonia organizing

overview:
Organizing pneumonia (OP) is a rare inflammatory lung disorder characterized by clinical symptoms such as flu-like illness as well as cough and shortness of breath with exertional activities. Wheezing and hemoptysis (blood when coughing) may occur rarely. OP refers to organized swirls of inflammatory tissue filling the small spherical units of the lungs called alveoli as well as the alveolar ducts. Individuals with OP experience inflammation of the bronchioles and alveolar lung spherical units simultaneously, which distinguishes it from other similar inflammatory lung disorders. Though the term pneumonia is used, OP is not an infection. It is a different disease from obliterative bronchiolitis which refers to scarring and narrowing of the small airways.
Several different known causes of OP have been identified, but most cases occur for no known reason (idiopathic). Idiopathic organizing pneumonia may also be called cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP).
Some people affected with this condition do not need treatment. When treatment is needed, corticosteroids, such as prednisone, are the most used medication. If the symptoms do not improve other treatment may be needed.
Since the first description in 1980 as bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP), OP has been known by different names.

symptoms:
Symptoms of organizing pneumonia vary from person to person depending upon the specific type. For example, people with idiopathic OP have a flu-like illness, while people with OP associated with an underlying connective-tissue disorder have cough or shortness of breath. Some individuals with OP such as focal OP may have no apparent symptoms, while others may have severe respiratory distress as in acute, rapidly progressive OP.
Symptoms usually develop slowly over a few weeks or months. The most common symptom is a persistent, nonproductive cough. Some affected individuals develop a flu-like illness characterized by a sore throat, a general feeling of ill health (malaise), weight loss and fatigue. Eventually, shortness of breath, especially from exertional activities may develop. The shortness of breath and cough may become progressively worse.
Individuals with OP may develop small crackling or rattling sounds in the lung (crackles or rales) that are apparent upon physical examination. In rare cases affected individuals may experience chest pain, joint pain (arthralgia), night sweats or coughing up blood (hemoptysis).
A rapidly progressive form of OP exists that can progress from symptom onset to acute respiratory failure in only a few days. This form of OP may be associated with an underlying fibrotic process.

