Ornithine Transcarbamylase Deficiency

synonyms:
hyperammonemia due to ornithine transcarbamylase deficiencyornithine carbamyltransferase deficiencyOTC deficiency

overview:
Ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency is a rare X-linked genetic disorder characterized by complete or partial lack of the enzyme ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC). OTC is one of six enzymes that play a role in the break down and removal of nitrogen the body, a process known as the urea cycle. The lack of the OTC enzyme results in excessive accumulation of nitrogen, in the form of ammonia (hyperammonemia), in the blood. Excess ammonia, which is a neurotoxin, travels to the central nervous system through the blood, resulting in the symptoms and physical findings associated with OTC deficiency. Symptoms include vomiting, refusal to eat, progressive lethargy, and coma.

symptoms:
The severity and age of onset of OTC deficiency vary from person to person, even within the same family. A severe form of the disorder affects some infants, typically males, shortly after birth (neonatal period). A milder form of the disorder affects some children later in infancy. Both males and females may develop symptoms of OTC deficiency during childhood. Most carrier females are healthy, but may be prone to severe headaches following protein intake.
Children and adults with mild forms of the disorder may only have a partial OTC enzyme deficiency and therefore a greater tolerance to protein in the diet. Male infants with the severe form of the disorder often have a complete lack of the OTC enzyme.
The severe form of OTC deficiency occurs in some affected males anywhere between 24 hours to a few days after birth, usually following a protein feeding. Initial symptoms may include refusal to eat, poor suck, vomiting, progressive lethargy, and irritability. The disorder may rapidly progress to include seizures, diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), an enlarged liver (hepatomegaly) and respiratory abnormalities. Affected infants and children may also exhibit the accumulation of fluid (edema) within the brain.
If left untreated, infants with the severe form of OTC deficiency may fall into coma and may potentially develop neurological abnormalities such as intellectual disability, developmental delays, and cerebral palsy. The longer an infant remains in hyperammonemic coma the greater the chance neurological abnormalities may develop. In most cases, the longer an infant is in hyperammonemic coma the more severe these neurological abnormalities become. If left untreated, hyperammonemic coma may result in life-threatening complications.
Some infants and children may have a milder form of OTC deficiency. These infants and children may not exhibit symptoms of OTC deficiency until later during life. Children who develop OTC deficiency later during life often express the disorder during an episode of illness, and present with hyperammonemia at that time. These episodes can recur, alternating between periods of wellness.
During a hyperammonemic episode, affected children may experience vomiting, lethargy, and irritability. Additional symptoms may include confusion or delirium, hyperactivity, self-mutilation such as biting oneself, and an impaired ability to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia). If left untreated a hyperammonemic episode may progress to coma and life-threatening complications.
OTC deficiency may not become apparent until adulthood. Adults who have OTC deficiency may exhibit migraines; nausea; difficulty forming words (dysarthria); an impaired ability to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia); confusion; hallucinations; and blurred vision.

