Orocraniodigital Syndrome

synonyms:
Cleft Lip/Palate with Abnormal Thumbs and MicrocephalyCranio-Oro-Digital SyndromeDigital-Oro-Cranio SyndromeJuberg Hayward Syndrome

overview:
Orocraniodigital syndrome is an extremely rare inherited disorder characterized by multiple malformations of the head and face (craniofacial area) and the fingers and toes (digits). Major characteristics may include a vertical groove in the upper lip (cleft lip) and/or the inside, upper portion of the mouth (cleft palate), an abnormally small head (microcephaly), widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism), improper development (hypoplasia) of the thumbs and/or toes, and/or webbing (syndactyly) of the toes. In some cases, malformations of certain skeletal bones may also be present. Mental retardation has occurred in the majority of cases. Orocraniodigital syndrome may be inherited as an autosomal recessive genetic trait.

symptoms:
In many cases, orocraniodigital syndrome is characterized by cleft lip and/or palate, malformations of the mouth and/or lips that are noticeable at birth (congenital).  A cleft is an incomplete closure or groove on the inside, upper portion of the mouth (palate) or lips, or both.  Clefts may be barely noticeable (occult), or they may cause severe deformities leading to difficulties in speaking.
There are several varieties of cleft lip and palate malformations.  The most severe types of clefts involve the lips, gums, and certain tissues on the roof of the mouth (hard and soft palates).  Less severe clefts may involve only one of these structures.  Clefts may occur on one (unilateral) or both sides (bilateral) of the lips and/or palate.
Other primary symptoms of orocraniodigital syndrome may include an abnormally small head (microcephaly), widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism), eyebrows that are slanted upward, and/or abnormalities affecting the thumbs and/or toes.  These abnormalities may include improper development (hypoplasia) or absence (agenesis) of the thumbs; webbing (syndactyly) of the toes; stiff thumbs; and/or thumbs that are located lower or higher than normal.
In some cases, affected infants may also have low birthweight and/or kidneys that are joined at the base (horseshoe kidneys).  The bone on the thumb side of the upper arm (radius) may be abnormally short or displaced (dislocated).  In addition, affected individuals may also have abnormally formed elbows that may limit mobility (arm extension) and/or minor malformations of the spine, ribs, and/or certain bones in the hands (carpal bones).  In the majority of cases, mental retardation may also occur.

