Orthostatic Hypotension

synonyms:
postural hypotension

overview:
Orthostatic hypotension (OH) is a common condition characterized as a drop in blood pressure that occurs when a person stands up. OH can cause lightheadedness, dizziness or even causing a person to faint. Symptoms can also be subtle or absent. By definition, the drop in blood pressure must be greater than 20mm Hg of mercury in systolic BP and/or more than 10 mm of mercury in diastolic BP within 3 minutes upon standing from sitting or from a lying down face-up (supine) position. There are numerous, varied causes of OH. Neurogenic orthostatic hypotension (NOH) is a rare subtype caused by underlying neurologic disorders that affect a specific part of the autonomic nervous system. The autonomic nervous system is the part of the nervous system that regulates certain involuntary body functions such as heart rate, blood pressure, sweating, and bowel and bladder control. The treatment of OH depends upon several factors including the specific underlying cause.

symptoms:
In some people, there may not be any noticeable symptoms despite a sudden and extreme drop in blood pressure upon rising from a reclining position. When symptoms occur they can vary greatly in expression from one individual to another. Common symptoms can include dizziness, lightheadedness, generalized weakness, leg buckling, nausea, blurry vision, fatigue, and headaches. Additional symptoms can include chest pain (angina), head and neck pain (often affecting neck and shoulders with a coat hanger distribution), and a decline in cognitive functioning such as difficulty concentrating.
Affected individuals may experience a temporary loss of consciousness or “blackout,” a condition known as syncope. There may be a gradual build up to an episode of syncope or it can occur suddenly.
A serious complication of OH is the risk of falling, which can lead to physical damage such as a broken hip or other broken bones. The constant dropping and raising of blood pressure associated with OH has also been identified as a risk factor in the development of stroke and other cardiovascular diseases.
Symptoms of OH on standing have been aggravated by raised ambient heat, such as hot weather, hot shower, hot tub, or when an affected individual has a fever. OH is often more common and more severe in the morning. Some individuals with NOH develop postprandial hypotension, which is defined as the development or worsening of hypotension approximately 30 minutes to 2 hours after eating a meal, particularly large meals high in carbohydrates.
Some individuals with NOH may also have high blood pressure when lying down (supine hypertension). Supine hypertension complicates treatment options for affected individuals.

