OSMED, Homozygous

synonyms:
Nance-Sweeney syndromeoto-spondylo-megaepiphyseal dysplasia, autosomal recessiveoto-spondylo-megaepiphyseal dysplasia, homozygous

overview:
Homozygous OSMED (oto-spondylo-megaepiphyseal dysplasia) is an extremely rare genetic disorder characterized by malformation (dysplasia) of certain bones, hearing loss and distinct facial features. Skeletal malformations affect the bones of the arms, legs and spines eventually resulting in disproportionate short stature. Hearing loss is often severe. Intelligence is normal. Homozygous OSMED occurs because of disruptions or changes (mutations) to the COL11A2 gene and is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.
Two additional disorders, Weissenbacher-Zweymuller syndrome and Stickler syndrome III, more commonly known as non-ocular Stickler syndrome, are also caused by mutations to this gene (allelic disorders). Some clinical researchers believe that each of these three disorders is a separate and distinct entity. Others believe that the three represent a range of severity of one syndrome. Regardless, these disorders involve alterations (mutations) of the collagen gene, COL11A2. Some researchers have suggested that the name OSMED be used as a general heading to consist of “heterozygous OSMED,” which encompasses Weissenbacher-Zweymuller syndrome and Stickler syndrome type III and is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, and “homozygous OSMED,” which encompasses autosomal recessive cases of oto-spondylo-megaepiphyseal dysplasia.

symptoms:
Symptoms associated with homozygous OSMED vary from case to case. Affected individuals have progressive, severe hearing loss, skeletal malformations and distinctive facial features.
Hearing loss in individuals with homozygous OSMED may be progressive and severe and occurs because of an impaired ability of the auditory nerves to transmit sensory input to the brain (sensorineural hearing loss). During infancy, affected individuals may also experience feeding difficulties, recurrent pulmonary infections, and inflammation of the main air passages (bronchioles) to the lung (bronchitis), and pneumonia.
Skeletal abnormalities associated with homozygous OSMED include malformation (dysplasia) of the long bones of the arms (humeri) and legs (femora). The “growing portion” or head of the long bones (epiphyses) is abnormally large and broad and the end portion of the shaft of the long bones is abnormally widened (metaphyseal flaring) resulting in a dumbbell shape. Affected individuals may also have joint contractures, abnormally large bones of the ankle (tarsal bones), and short hands with stubby fingers. In some cases, the upper portion (capital) of the thighbone where it meets the hip (capital femoral epiphyses) is abnormally small or absent. As affected individuals age, they may develop progressive front-to-back curvature of the spine (lordosis) and large, painful joints with reduced mobility. Skeletal abnormalities associated with homozygous OSMED eventually result in short stature with disproportionately short limbs.
Affected individuals may also develop osteoarthritis, a condition characterized by the breakdown of cartilage and pain, degeneration, and stiffness of affected joints. Individuals with homozygous OSMED also have flattening of the central regions of bones in the spinal column (platyspondyly) and progressive fusion of the eight small bones of the wrists (carpal bones).
Distinctive facial features associated with homozygous OSMED include an underdeveloped jaw bone (mandibular hypoplasia), a rounded (bulbous) upturned nose with nostrils that are flared forward (anteverted nares), and underdevelopment of the bones of the middle of the face (midface hypoplasia) resulting in a flat facial appearance. Affected individuals may also have Pierre-Robin sequence, an assortment of abnormalities that may occur as a distinct syndrome or as part of another underlying disorder. Pierre-Robin sequence is characterized by an unusually small jaw (micrognathia), downward displacement or retraction of the tongue (glossoptosis), and incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate). Cleft palate may also occur as an isolated finding

