OSMED, Heterozygous

synonyms:
Oto-Spondylo-Megaepiphyseal Dysplasia, Autosomal DominantOto-Spondylo-Megaepiphyseal Dysplasia, HeterozygousPierre-Robin Syndrome with Fetal ChondrodysplasiaStickler Syndrome Type IIIWeissenbacher-Zweymuller SyndromeWZS

overview:
Heterozygous OSMED (oto-spondyl-megaepiphyseal dysplasia) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by skeletal malformations resulting in shortening of the upper limbs and thighs and short stature (rhizomelic dwarfism). Additional symptoms include distinctive facial features and delays in psychomotor development. After the initial period of growth deficiency, affected individuals experience gradual improvement in bone growth that leads to normal physical development by early childhood. Mental and motor development is also normal by early childhood. In some cases, affected individuals develop hearing loss. Heterozygous OSMED occurs because of disruptions or changes (mutations) to the COL11A2 gene.
A group of collagen disorders (i.e., OSMED, Weissenbacher-Zweymuller syndrome and non-ocular Stickler syndrome or Stickler syndrome type III) are all caused by mutations to the COL11A2 gene (allelic disorders). Some researchers consider these three disorders separate entities; others believe that they are the same disorder or different expresses of one disorder. Recently, some researchers have suggested that the name OSMED be used as a general heading to consist of “heterozygous OSMED,” which encompasses Weissenbacher-Zweymuller syndrome and Stickler syndrome type III and is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait and “homozygous OSMED,” which encompasses autosomal recessive cases of oto-spondylo-megaepiphyseal dysplasia.

symptoms:
Heterozygous OSMED is characterized by skeletal malformations, distinct facial features and delayed psychomotor development. The specific symptoms affecting each child vary from case to case.
Affected children have abnormally short bones of the upper arms and thighs (rhizomelia) resulting in short stature during infancy and early childhood (rhizomelic dwarfism). The long bones of the upper arm (humeri) and thigh (femora) are short with broad heads (dumbbell-shaped). Affected individuals may also have clefts that resemble fractures in certain bones of the vertebrae (vertebral coronal clefts).
Affected infants may also exhibit a delay in the acquisition of skills requiring coordination of muscular and mental activity (psychomotor delays). As affected individuals age, they experience an increase in growth rate eventually reaching normal height by 5 or 6 years of age. Mental and motor development also becomes normal by this age.
Distinctive facial features associated with heterozygous OSMED include an abnormally small jaw (micrognathia), widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), depressed nasal bridge, a small upturned nose, and underdevelopment of the bones of the middle portion of the face (midface hypoplasia) giving the face a flat appearance. Affected individuals may also have Pierre-Robin sequence, an assortment of abnormalities that may occur as a distinct syndrome or as part of another underlying disorder. Pierre-Robin sequence is characterized by an unusually small jaw (micrognathia), downward displacement or retraction of the tongue (glossoptosis), and incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate). Cleft palate may also occur as an isolated finding.
Some individuals develop hearing loss because of an impaired ability of the auditory nerves to transmit sensory input to the brain (sensorineural hearing loss). Such hearing loss may become progressively more pronounced.

