Osteonecrosis

synonyms:
aseptic necrosisavascular necrosis of boneischemic necrosis of bone

overview:
Osteonecrosis, also known as avascular necrosis (AVN), aseptic necrosis or ischemic bone necrosis, is a disease resulting in the death of bone cells. If the process involves the bones near a joint, it often leads to collapse of the joint surface and subsequent arthritis due to an irregular joint surface. The exact cause is unknown.
Although it can happen in any bone, osteonecrosis most commonly affects the ends (epiphysis) of long bones such as the femur (thigh bone). Commonly involved bones are the upper femur (ball part of the hip socket) the lower femur (a part of the knee joint), the upper humerus (upper arm bone involving the shoulder joint), and the bones of ankle joint. The disease may affect just one bone, more than one bone at the same time, or more than one bone at different times. Orthopedic surgeons most often diagnose the disease using either an X-ray of magnetic resonance scan (MRI).
The amount of disability that results from osteonecrosis depends on what part of the bone is affected, how large an area is involved, how far the disease has progressed, and how effectively the bone rebuilds itself. The process of bone rebuilding takes place after an injury as well as during normal growth. Normally, bone continuously breaks down and rebuilds – old bone is reabsorbed and replaced with new bone. The process keeps the skeleton strong and helps it to maintain a balance of minerals. With osteonecrosis, the healing process is usually ineffective and the bone tissues break down faster than the body can repair them. If left untreated, the disease progresses, and the bone may develop a crack whereby the bone can get compressed (collapse) together (similar to compressing a snowball). If this occurs at the end of the bone, it leads to an irregular joint surface, arthritic pain and loss of function of the affected areas.

symptoms:
In the early stages of osteonecrosis, patients may not have any symptoms. As the disease progresses, however, most patients experience joint pain – at first, only when putting weight on the affected joint, and then even when resting. Pain usually develops gradually and may be mild or severe. If osteonecrosis progresses and the bone and surrounding joint surface collapse, pain may develop or increase dramatically. Pain may be severe enough to cause joint stiffness by limiting the range of motion in the affected joint. Disabling osteoarthritis may develop in the affected joint. The period of time between the first symptoms and loss of joint function is different for each patient, ranging from several months to more than a year.

