Osteochondritis Dissecans

synonyms:
osteochondrosis dissecansosteochondral lesion

overview:
Summary
Osteochondritis dissecans is a joint condition that occurs when a piece of cartilage and the thin layer of bone beneath it separate from the underlying bone. It may be asymptomatic during the early stages of the disease. People with symptoms may experience pain, catching and/or decreased range of motion in the affected joint, especially if the cartilage and bone break off into the joint space. Osteochondritis dissecans can affect people of all ages, but it is usually diagnosed in children between the ages of 10 and 15 years. Osteochondritis dissecans mostly affects the knees, elbows or ankles of young patients who are heavily involved in sports at a young age. It mostly affects only one joint and only one side of the body but may be found on both sides of the body, such as in both knees or both elbows. The disease process is characterized by abnormal alteration of bone in joints that may lead to disruption and separation of the overlying cartilage.
Treatment for the condition varies depending on many factors, including the age of the affected person, stage of the lesion and the severity of the symptoms, but may include rest, weight bearing restriction, brace for unloading or immobilization or surgery and/or physical therapy. If improperly treated, osteochondritis dissecans may cause premature osteoarthritis.
Introduction
In 1840 a scientist named Paré was the first to describe the removal of loose bodies (osteochondral fragments) from a joint. In 1870, another scientist by the name Paget described the disease process as “quiet necrosis” due to formation of loose, dead osteochondral (joint bone and cartilage) fragments on articular (joint) surfaces. In 1888, another scientist named König described a condition that led to loose body formation which he called “arthrophytes” in a patient without known trauma. It was believed that inflammation of bone and cartilage followed by tissue death and separation (of bone and cartilage from the underlying bone) was the underlying mechanism of the disease.
Though this theory has been questioned, it was the basis for the term osteochondritis dissecans which is derived from “osteochondritis” meaning inflammation of the joint surface and “dissec” meaning to separate.

symptoms:
Symptoms of osteochondritis dissecans are often vague and occur on and off especially in early stages of the condition but may increase with activities such as climbing stairs or throwing. As the condition progresses and more loose bits of cartilage and bone are found in the joint, there may be catching (partial inhibition of movement), locking, (total inhibition of movement) or a sense of giving way of the joint and there may also be the sensation of loose fragments within the joint. Additionally, there may be pain and swelling of the affected joint.
When a doctor evaluates a person with osteochondritis dissecans, the findings are often vague. There may be a grating sound or sensation which is produced by friction between bone and cartilage (crepitus), joint swelling (effusion) or tenderness (pain with pressing). Tenderness is often poorly localized early in the condition but has more definite locations later. In the knee and ankle, patients may even take on an abnormal gait (walking motion) to avoid pain or joint dysfunction. In the ankle, there may be crepitus, tenderness, swelling and inflammation like in the knee, but there may also be pain with compression of the ankle (tibiotalar joint). Osteochondritis dissecans of the elbow is associated with pain, swelling, stiffness and limited range of motion. Although most people with this disease have joint pain and swelling, these symptoms are also associated with many other disorders which can make it difficult to narrow a diagnosis.

