Osteosarcoma

synonyms:
osteogenic sarcoma

overview:
Osteosarcoma is a form of cancer. It is a type of tumor that affects the bones. Osteosarcoma can affect people of any age but is most common during the teen-aged years and is the most common bone cancer affecting children and adolescents under the age of 20. The long bones of the legs, usually near where they connect to the knees, and the upper long bone of the arms, near where this bone meets the shoulders are the most common sites for osteosarcoma formation. Symptoms will vary depending upon the exact location and extent of disease. Pain is the most common symptom of osteosarcoma and there is often a mass or bump that can be felt (palpable). Eighty percent of individuals present with localized disease, which means the cancer remains in the area it first developed. Osteosarcoma can spread (metastasize) to other areas of the body, most likely the lungs. The exact cause is unknown in most individuals, but osteosarcoma can be induced by radiation. Most individuals are treated with a combination of chemotherapy and surgery. Sometimes, radiation therapy may be used.

symptoms:
The most commonly affected bones are the long bones of the legs. These are the femur and the tibia. The femur, also called the thighbone, runs from the hip to the knee, and the tibia, or shinbone, runs from the knee to the ankle. The femur and the tibia meet at the knee where they help to form the knee joint. Osteosarcomas can form where these bones are growing the fastest in children and adolescents, which is called the growth plate. About 50% of individuals develop an osteosarcoma around the knee. For the legs this is near the knees and includes the bottom of the femur and the tops of the tibia. Osteosarcomas can also affect the upper part of the long bone of the arms called the humerus. The humerus runs from the elbow to the shoulder. The area near where the humerus connects to the shoulder accounts for about 15% of osteosarcomas.
Less often, the middle portions of the femurs or tibia can be affected. Osteosarcomas can potentially be found in any bone of the body, although this is far less common. Other areas that can be affected include the spine, shoulder, pelvis, skull, or jaw.
Pain is common in the area where the tumor is located. Pain may increase or decrease (wax and wane) over time. Pain may increase when a person does something that requires effort, such as lifting or another activity. A tumor may appear as a mass that can be seen or can be felt (palpable) and may be tender to the touch. Swelling near the tumor is also common. Sometimes, a tumor causes decreased movement in the affected arm or leg or nearby joint. Some people may limp because of a tumor in the leg or near the knee. Bones affected by osteosarcoma are weakened, and they may be more likely to fracture or break, although this is not a common occurrence.
Osteosarcomas can spread (metastasize) to other areas of the body, most often the lungs. Generally, if the cancer has spread to other areas, then the prognosis is worse. Researchers are currently working on ways to prevent or treat metastatic osteosarcoma.Osteosarcomas can be classified as high-grade, intermediate-grade or low-grade. This refers to how the cancer looks like under a microscope and determines how likely an osteosarcoma is to grow and spread. High-grade osteosarcomas are the most common form in children and adolescents and are the fastest growing form. They also have the greatest tendency to spread (metastasize).

