Osteomyelitis

synonyms:
direct or contiguous osteomyelitis.

overview:
Summary
Osteomyelitis can be broken down into “osteo” meaning bone, and “myelitis”, meaning inflammation of the fatty tissues within the bone. Osteomyelitis is caused by an infection of the bone or joint, and can be both acute and chronic. It can occur at any age and involve any bone. These infections can be due to one, or many types of bacteria and/or fungi. In order of frequency, osteomyelitis can be the result of a trauma, surgery, or joint insertion or any type of prosthetic material; it can be due to lack of blood flow in diabetes associated foot infections, or it can be the result of an infection that has spread via the blood and has reached the bone (seen mostly in prepubescent children or the elderly).
Among children and teens, the long bones of the legs and arms are most frequently affected. In adults, osteomyelitis most often affects the vertebrae of the spine and/or the hips. However, extremities are frequently involved due to skin wounds, trauma and surgeries. The prevalence of this disease depends on the age group and disease category in question. With respect to the blood-related spread of infection to the bone, which is the most common type in children, the United States estimates 2-5 cases per 10,000 people, with an estimated higher incidence in developing countries. Older adults are more prone to osteomyelitis because they experience more disorders that can lead to infection, namely orthopedic surgeries and diabetes mellitus.
The overall observed trend in osteomyelitis is that it has been increasing over the last few decades. This could be because we have gotten better at diagnosing osteomyelitis, but also because the prevalence of certain risk factors is increasing, namely diabetes. Osteomyelitis patients may present with many symptoms, ranging from an open wound that exposes fractured bone, to no obvious skin lesion but with associated swelling, bone pain, lower extremity warmth, and tenderness when examined. With the appropriate diagnostics, antibiotics can make up the effective treatment regimen, but may include the surgical removal of dead bone in chronic osteomyelitis.
Introduction
Osteomyelitis is one of the oldest diseases ever recorded. Evidence of the disease has been found in the fractured spine of a Permian reptile, close to 250 million years ago. This evidence consisted of bone inflammation based on the roughened swollen area above the fracture, hinting that the injury was in fact infected. Hippocrates (460-370 BC) also recognized infection after bone fracture, but it was only in 1773 that an Englishman named William Bromfield published on the observed “abcessus in medulla”, referring to the infected fatty tissues within the inner cavity of the bone. In 1844, French physician and renowned surgeon Auguste Nélaton coined the term “osteomyelitis”, which described an infectious condition of the entire bone, but included “itis” in the word so as to make reference to the inflammatory damage. Bone is usually good at fighting infection, but trauma, bacteremia, surgery, or foreign body insertion may disrupt blood flow and lead to the development of osteomyelitis. Early diagnosis is very important because fast antibiotic delivery may prevent permanent bone loss.

symptoms:
Acute osteomyelitis is a serious bone inflammation that can result from a previous trauma, puncture wound, surgery, bone fracture, abscessed tooth, or infection of soft tissue, the ear or sinus. Osteomyelitis can be the result of a spreading infection in the blood (hematogenous) and occurs more often in children than adults. In prepubescent children, it usually affects the long bones: the tibia and the femur. The most common site of infection is the metaphysis, which is the narrow portion of the long bone). In adults, the bones of the spinal column (vertebra) are often affected.
Initially there may be several days of fever, pain at the site of infection, and a generalized feeling of ill health (malaise). This may be followed by an increase in fever (104-105 degrees Fahrenheit), deep localized bone pain, chills, sweating, swelling and painful or limited movement of the nearby joints. The skin near the affected bone may be red (erythema) and there may be a purulent buildup (pus), loss of calcium, destruction of the surrounding tissue (necrosis) and bone deterioration or deformity. However, patients with osteomyelitis involving the hip, vertebrae, and/or pelvis are less likely to present with many signs other than pain. In long bone infections, if the infection spreads from the metaphysis through the bone cortex and within the joint capsular reflection of knee, any discharge of pus into the joint can present as septic arthritis secondary to osteomyelitis. These joints include the knees, wrists hip, ankles, symphysis pubis, and shoulders.
Chronic osteomyelitis usually occurs after an acute episode of osteomyelitis when the infection has not been totally cured, and is sometimes associated with a draining sinus tract. There may be bone pain, swelling, redness and tenderness of the affected area. A discharge of pus from an opening to the infected bone is often the first symptom. There may also be destruction of the bone with pieces of the infected bone separating from the healthy bone. When this occurs, surgery to remove the bone fragments may be necessary.
Spinal infections, referring to vertebral osteomyelitis, are most commonly distributed or spread by way of the bloodstream, or present as post-surgical complications. These spinal infections are often characterized by chronic back pain not relieved by ordinary treatment, including bed rest, heat or pain relievers. There may be fever, localized tenderness, pain, muscle spasms and limited movement. Any patients with known fever, weight loss, bacteremia and/or endocarditis should be sent for spinal imaging if they are experiencing new or worsening back pain. This form of osteomyelitis usually affects people over 50 years of age, and is usually caused by a previous injury, urinary tract infection, inflammation of the lining of the heart (endocarditis) or drug addiction. (For more information on this disorder, choose “Endocarditis” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
Anaerobic osteomyelitis often affects the lower jawbone (mandible), skull or feet. It is characterized by ulceration and swelling, foul smelling drainage and redness of the affected area.
Diabetic foot infections can progress into osteomyelitis as a result blood vessel insufficiency. These infections usually occur following skin ulcerations in patients with nerve damage (neuropathy). This phenomenon is more common in people with diabetes mellitus or vascular diseases affecting the extremities, especially the toes and small bones of the feet. It is usually seen in people over 50 years old and is characterized by pain and redness of the affected area (erythema), swelling, ulcerations, and drainage of pus. This type of osteomyelitis is difficult to treat because of the underlying vascular disorder that can impair the therapeutic effect of antibiotic treatment.

