Osteopetrosis

synonyms:
Albers-Schonberg diseasemarble bone diseaseosteosclerosis fragilis generalisata

overview:
Summary
Osteopetrosis is marked by increased bone density due to a defect in bone reabsorption by cells called osteoclasts. This leads to accumulation of bone with defective architecture, making them brittle and susceptible to fracture and to skeletal abnormalities. Although symptoms may not initially be apparent in people with mild forms of this disorder, trivial injuries may cause bone fractures due to bone fragility. Early diagnosis is important in the most severe forms of these disorders, as they cause irreversible complications and may be treated with hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
There are three types of osteopetrosis, and they are classified by their mode of inheritance: autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive and X-linked recessive. The autosomal dominant form is the most common: usually, patients have mild symptoms that begin in late childhood to adulthood. The autosomal recessive form, also called the malignant infantile type, is apparent soon after birth and frequently shortens life expectancy. The X-linked form of osteopetrosis is extremely rare, with only a few cases reported. There is also an intermediate type of osteopetrosis, comprising both milder autosomal recessive forms and dominant ones with early and severe presentation.

Introduction
Osteopetrosis was first identified by radiologist Albers-Schonberg in 1904.

symptoms:
Osteopetrosis is characterized by overly dense bones throughout the body. Symptoms include fractures, low blood cell production and loss of cranial nerve function causing blindness, deafness and/or facial nerve paralysis. Affected individuals may experience frequent infections of teeth and the bone in the jaw.
Osteopetrosis, autosomal recessive; malignant infantile typeThe most severe type of osteopetrosis, malignant infantile type, is apparent from birth, and if left untreated, can lead to death in the first decade of life. Symptoms vary depending on the gene variant (mutation). Affected individuals have abnormal hardening of bone (osteosclerosis); fragility fractures, usually of the ribs and long bones; large head (macrocephaly) and small jaw (micrognathia); growth delay and increased density of the cranial bones (cranial hyperostosis) leading to nerve compression. They may also have hydrocephalus, which is the accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the skull owing to inhibition of CSF normal flow and abnormal widening (dilatation) of the cerebral spaces of the brain (ventricles), causing increased pressure on brain tissue. Symptoms that affect vision may include wasting away (atrophy) of the retina, widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), eyes protruding from the orbits (exophthalmos), crossed eyes (strabismus), involuntary rhythmic movements of the eyes (nystagmus) and blindness.
Other symptoms associated with malignant infantile type of osteopetrosis include effects of reduced bone marrow space, such as marked deficiency of all types of blood cells (pancytopenia), formation and development of blood cells outside the bone marrow, as in the spleen and liver (extramedullary hematopoiesis) leading to abnormal enlargement of these organs (hepatosplenomegaly) and the occurrence of myeloid tissue in extramedullary sites (myeloid metaplasia). This may lead to frequent infections such as pneumonia and urinary tract infections and chronic inflammation of the mucous membranes in the nose (rhinitis). Affected individuals may also have low levels of iron in red blood cells (anemia) due to both reduced bone marrow space and red blood cell production and to increased destruction of red blood cells due to an enlarged spleen. Of note, hematological problems usually present before neurological ones.
Some affected individuals experience hearing loss, eating difficulties, delays in acquiring skills that require the coordination of muscles and voluntary movements (delayed psychomotor development), delayed tooth development and severe dental caries, and inflammation of the lumbar vertebrae (osteomyelitis). Patients can also have seizures due to low levels of calcium in the blood. Symptoms of severe neurodegeneration can develop in some people with rare variants of malignant infantile osteopetrosis.
Osteopetrosis, autosomal dominant; adult typeA milder form of osteopetrosis, the adult type, is usually diagnosed in late childhood or adulthood. There are mostly bone symptoms, including osteosclerosis, fractures after minimal trauma (usually of the ribs and long bones), dental abscess, osteomyelitis (especially of the jaw) and cranial hyperostosis. Some individuals with this type may not have any symptoms (asymptomatic).
Affected individuals sometimes also experience rhinitis, hepatosplenomegaly, anemia and extramedullary hematopoiesis.
Osteopetrosis, intermediate autosomalThe intermediate type is usually found in children and can be inherited as an autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant pattern. The severity of the disease is variable, but in general distinguished from “classical” recessive and dominant forms. Symptoms include abnormal hardening of bones; fractures; osteomyelitis especially of the mandible, abnormally close knees in the presence of markedly diverging ankles (genu valgum) and cranial hyperostosis.
Symptoms of the intermediate type of osteopetrosis may also include gradual deterioration of the nerves of the eyes (optic atrophy), loss of vision, muscular weakness and rhinitis. Some affected individuals may have abnormal protrusion of the lower jaw (mandibular prognathism); dental anomalies such as deciduous teeth retention (a condition where baby teeth do not fall out), tooth crown malformation and dental caries and facial paralysis. Other symptoms include hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, decreased levels of circulating blood platelets (thrombocytopenia), pancytopenia and extramedullary hematopoiesis.
Osteopetrosis: X-linked recessiveX-linked osteopetrosis is extremely rare but severe, with only a few cases reported worldwide. In addition to classical symptoms linked with osteopetrosis, it is associated with immunodeficiency, localized fluid retention and tissue swelling (lymphedema) as well as abnormalities of the hair, skin, nails and sweat glands (ectodermal dysplasia).

