Otopalatodigital Syndrome Type I and II

synonyms:
cranioorodigital syndromefaciopalatoosseous syndromeFPOOPD syndromeTaybi syndrome

overview:
Otopalatodigital syndromes type I and II are rare X-linked genetic disorders in which complete expression of the disease occurs only in males. Females may be affected with some of the symptoms. OPD type I is the milder form of the disease and is characterized by cleft palate, hearing loss and skeletal abnormalities in the skull and limbs. OPD type II includes these abnormalities, frequently in a more severe form, as well as growth deficiency and, in a minority of patients, abnormalities of the brain. It is frequently associated with death in infancy.

symptoms:
Individuals with OPD type I typically have mild short stature, an incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate), a downward slant of the opening between the upper and lower eyelids, hearing loss due to a defect of the middle ear (conductive hearing loss) and abnormally shaped fingers and toes. Symptoms that are sometimes seen in people with OPD type I are: short, broad thumbs and great toes; wide spaces between the toes; one or more fingers bent to the side; two or more digits united (syndactyly); short fingernails; dislocation of the head of the radius (one of the bones of the forearm); a broad bridge of the nose; underdeveloped bones of the face; and/or slow speech development. Females with the disorder may have an overhanging brow, a depressed nasal bridge, a wide space between the eyes and a flat midface. The symptoms and signs expressed in females vary and are fewer. Females do not have the full expression of this disorder.
Individuals with OPD type II are more severely affected. Major characteristics in males with this disorder may be a small head, broad forehead, flat bridge of the nose, wide space between the eyes, small mouth, cleft palate, downward slant of the opening between the upper and lower eyelids, small mouth, small jaw, fingers that are bent and overlap, short fingers and toes, curved long bones of the forearms and legs, small chest, heart defects and occasionally intellectual disability. Less common symptoms may include split tongue-tip, clouded eyes and Dandy-Walker malformation (a brain malformation). OPD type II typically results in stillbirth or early infant death in males. Females do not have the full expression of OPD type II and may have mild symptoms such as an arched palate in the mouth, broad face, low-set ears, split uvula (the fleshy lobe in the middle of the back border of the soft palate), hearing loss, fingers bent to the side, short stature and a downward slant of the opening between the upper and lower eyelids.

