Ovarian Cancer

overview:
Ovarian cancer refers to cancer that arises in the almond-shaped reproductive organs in women in which eggs, or ova, are produced (ovaries), in either of the two tubes through which eggs travel from the ovaries to the uterus (fallopian tubes), or in the membrane that lines the pelvis and the abdominal cavity and covers all of the abdominal organs (peritoneum). There are usually no symptoms (asymptomatic) during the early stages. As a result, ovarian cancer is usually not diagnosed until an advanced stage. Common symptoms that can develop include abdominal swelling or bloating, unintended weight loss, or changes in the bowel habits including constipation. The cause of ovarian cancer is multifactorial, which means that multiple factors that occur together are necessary for the cancer to develop. These factors include genetic, immunologic and environmental factors. About 20% of all women with ovarian cancer have a variation in one of two genes calledBRCA1orBRCA2. BRCA-associated ovarian cancer is not specifically discussed in this report. NORD has a separate report on ovarian cancer caused by variations in these two genes that is titledHereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer (HBOC) Syndrome.
Ovarian cancer is a nonspecific term for a group of tumors. However, more than 90% of ovarian cancer arises from epithelial cells; these cells cover most internal and external surfaces of the body and its organs. Epithelial cancer of the ovaries, fallopian tubes, and peritoneum share similar behavior and characteristics. These closely related cancers are often grouped together and can be referred to as epithelial ovarian cancer or EOC. This report primarily deals with epithelial ovarian cancer (carcinoma). Most instances of EOC are high grade serous carcinoma. Most high grade serous carcinomas are now believed to originate in the very tips of the fallopian tubes. Additional subtypes of EOC are low-grade serous carcinoma, mucinous, clear cell, endometroid, and undifferentiated, in which the cancer cells are very immature and do not look like the cells in the tissue in which the cancer begins.
Other types of ovarian cancer include stromal tumors, in which cancer arises in the ovarian tissue that contains hormone-producing cells, and germ cell tumors, in which cancer arises in the egg-producing cells. Stromal tumors are also called sex cord-stromal tumors and make up about 7% of women with ovarian cancer. Types of stromal tumor include granulosa, granulosa-theca, and Sertoli-Leydig cell. Germ cell tumors are extremely rare and occur in younger women (about 80% in women under 30 years of age). Types of germ cell tumors include teratoma, dysgerminoma, endodermal sinus tumor, and choriocarcinoma.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms and physical findings of ovarian cancer can vary from one person to another, depending upon the extent and region(s) of involvement and other factors. Ovarian cancer usually does not cause any symptoms in the early stages. Symptoms may be described as acute (developing rapidly and severely) or subacute (having a slower onset and slower progression).
Affected individuals can develop abdominal bloating, the need to urinate quickly and frequently, changes in bowel habits including constipation, difficulty eating and a sense of feeling full quickly, unintended weight loss, and pelvic or abdominal pain or discomfort. Some women may have ascites, a condition characterized by the buildup of fluid in the abdomen. Additional symptoms that can develop including fatigue, back pain, an upset stomach, pain during sex, and changes to the menstrual cycle. Some women have an adnexal mass. An adnexal mass of the uterus is found in any area nearby the uterus that is related structurally or functionally. This includes the ovaries, fallopian tubes, and other nearby tissue. An adnexal mass can sometimes be the first sign of ovarian cancer and can cause a sense of pressure or pain in the pelvic region.
Some women develop more severe symptoms of ovarian cancer. This usually occurs when the cancer is at an advanced stage. Such symptoms include fluid buildup around the lungs (pleural effusion) and obstruction or blockage of the digestive tract (bowel obstruction). The pleura are thin membranes that line the lungs. A small amount of fluid allows the lungs to move within the chest cavity. When excess fluid builds up in this space, the lungs cannot move easily or properly. Pleural effusion can cause shortness of breath, a cough, or chest pain.
Bowel obstruction refers to the inability of the body to propel waste through the intestines. This can cause crampy abdominal pain, loss of appetite, swelling of the abdomen, and constipation. Severe nausea and vomiting can also occur.

