Paget’s Disease of the Breast

synonyms:
mammary Paget's diseasePaget's disease of the nipplePaget's disease of the nipple and areola

overview:
Summary
Paget’s disease of the breast is a rare form of breast cancer that almost exclusively occurs in women. However, rare cases have been reported in men. Paget’s disease of the breast is characterized by inflammatory, “eczema-like” changes of the nipple that may extend to involve the areola, which is the circular, darkened (pigmented) region of skin surrounding the nipple. Initial findings often include itching (pruritus), scaling, and crusting of and/or discharge from the nipple. In individuals with Paget’s disease of the breast, distinctive tumor cells (known as Paget cells) are present within the outermost layer of skin (epidermis) of the nipple, when viewed under a microscope. Most women with this disorder have an underlying cancer (malignancy) affecting the milk ducts (ductal carcinoma). The milk ducts are the channels that carry milk secreted by lobes of the breast to the nipple. The exact cause of Paget’s disease of the breast is not fully understood.
Introduction
Paget’s disease of the breast was originally reported in 1874 by Sir James Paget, an English surgeon, who also described an unrelated skeletal condition known as Paget’s disease of the bone. It is essential to note that these disorders are distinct entities that are medically unrelated.

symptoms:
Paget’s disease of the breast is a malignant (cancerous) condition that initially appears as chronic, inflammatory, “eczema-like” changes of the nipple and adjacent areas.
In individuals with Paget’s disease of the breast, initial characteristic skin changes may include the appearance of reddish (erythematous), scaling, crusting, and/or abnormally thickened skin patches (plaques) or lesions on the nipple that may extend to adjacent areas of the areola. Some affected individuals may also have abnormal discharge from the nipple. Additional symptoms may include itching (pruritus) or burning sensations and/or oozing or bleeding of the affected area. Eventually, pain and sensitivity of the affected area may be present. Early on, the skin symptoms of Paget’s disease of the breast may fluctuate, improving only to worsen again. Paget’s disease of the breast usually affects one breast (unilateral), but there are rare cases in which both breasts are involved (bilateral).
The initial skin changes of Paget’s disease of the breast may appear relatively benign and many individuals may overlook such symptoms, mistakenly attributing them to an inflammatory skin condition or infection. As a result, diagnosis may be delayed, often up to six months or more. Most individuals with the condition eventually seek medical attention due to associated itching or burning sensations, soreness, or pain of the affected area.
Most women with Paget’s disease of the breast have an underlying malignancy, which may be completely contained within the milk ducts (ductal carcinoma in situ) or may have invaded the surrounding tissue, potentially spreading to the lymph nodes under the arms (axillary lymph nodes) and other regions of the body (metastatic disease).
Approximately 50 percent or more of affected individuals may have a lump or mass that may be felt (palpated) below the nipple. Some individuals with Paget’s disease of the breast may have additional symptoms or physical findings. For example, in some instances, the nipple may turn inward (retracted nipple).
The overall disease course may vary greatly from one person to another, depending upon the nature and size of an underlying malignancy, whether a palpable breast tumor is present upon diagnosis, whether metastatic disease is present, specific treatment measures followed, and other possible factors.

