Pallister Killian Mosaic Syndrome

synonyms:
chromosome 12, Isochromosome 12p syndromeKillian syndromeKillian Teschler-Nicola syndromePallister mosaic syndromeTeschler-Nicola Killian syndromePKSisochromosome 12p syndrometetrasomy 12p, mosaic

overview:
Summary
Pallister-Killian mosaic syndrome is a rare chromosomal disorder caused by the presence of at least four copies of the short arm of chromosome 12 instead of the normal two. Major symptoms may include a coarse face with a high forehead, sparse hair on the scalp, an abnormally wide space between the eyes, a fold of the skin over the inner corner of the eyes, and a broad nasal bridge with a highly arched palate. Intellectual disability, loss of muscle tone, and streaks of skin lacking color are often present.
Introduction
In 1977, the syndrome was reported independently by Pallister, and again in 1981 by Teschler-Nicola and Killian. However, it wasn’t until 2003 when Pallister performed chromosome an analysis on skin fibroblast that the presence of tetrasomy 12p was found.

symptoms:
Individuals with Pallister-Killian mosaic syndrome typically have low muscle tone at birth (hypotonia), sparse scalp hair, a high forehead, a coarse face, an abnormally wide space between the eyes, a broad nasal bridge, a highly arched palate, a fold of the skin over the inner corner of the eyes, and large ears with lobes that are thick and protrude outward.
Infants that are born with significant hypotonia can experience problems with feeding, breathing, walking and standing. About seventy percent of affected individuals are unable to walk without assistance.
Additional features frequently found in affected individuals may include streaks of skin in which there is no color (hypopigmentation); extra nipples; seizures; droopy upper eyelids, crossed eyes (strabismus); joints that will not move (contractures); and delays in perceiving, recognizing, judging, sensing, reasoning or imagining (cognitive delays). Intellectual disability and difficulties with speech development often occur as well. In rare cases, affected children may experience hearing loss.
Congenital heart defects, hernias of the diaphragm, a narrowing of the external auditory canal (stenosis) and an abnormal opening in the anus have also been associated with Pallister-Killian Mosaic Syndrome. Some affected individuals may have an underdeveloped (hypoplastic) lung, abnormalities of the genitourinary system, and skeletal malformations. Symptoms may vary according to which tissue has the additional chromosomal material, and may also affect each side of the body unevenly.

