Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Neoplasms (pNENs)

synonyms:
pancreatic endocrine tumorspancreatic islet cell tumorspancreatic neuroendocrine tumorspNETislet cell carcinomaislet cell tumors

overview:
The pancreas is a gland located between the stomach, spleen, duodenum and colon transversum. It contains specialized exocrine cells that secrete enzymes that travel to the intestines and aid in digestion as well as endocrine cells, so called islet cells. Pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms (pNENs) are an increasingly common group of malignancies that arise within the endocrine tissue of the pancreas. Endocrine tissue is specialized tissue that contains hormone-secreting cells (e.g. α-cells, ß-cells). These cells secrete several different hormones into the blood (endocrine) or to local cells (paracrine, autocrine). These hormones have a variety of functions within the body (e.g. glucose-metabolism). Neoplasms that arise from endocrine tissue may also secrete hormones, resulting in excessive levels of these hormones in the body and potentially a wide variety of symptoms. There are several different subtypes of functioning pNENs distinguished by the specific type of hormone that they secrete. Insulinomas and gastrinomas are the most common types of hormone secreting pNENs.
Although there is no difference in diagnosis and therapy, pNENs can be differentiated as functioning or nonfunctioning. Functioning pNENs secrete hormones into the bloodstream, which cause special symptoms; nonfunctioning neoplasms may produce hormones, but no systemic symptoms. Nonfunctioning neuroendocrine neoplasms can still cause symptoms relating to tumor size and location such as obstruction or internal bleeding. They have some different differentiation (G1-3), but all of them have the potential for malignant transformation. Most pNENs occur sporadically, but in some cases, pNENs may occur as part of a larger genetic syndrome such as multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) or von Hippel Lindau (VHL) syndrome.
Pancreatic cancer as a general term usually refers to pancreatic adenocarcinoma, an aggressive malignant cancer with a poor prognosis. Approximately 95 percent of pancreatic malignancies are adenocarcinomas, for which the prognoses are in general worse than the prognosis of G1- and G2 pNENs. G3 neuroendocrine carcinomas have a similar poor prognosis as pancreatic adenocarinomas.

symptoms:
The symptoms, severity and rate of progression of pNENs can vary greatly from one person to another, even among individuals with the same type of malignancy.
ASYMPTOMATIC NEOPLASMSThe so called nonfunctioning pNENs may not cause any symptoms and will sometimes be diagnosed incidentally. Since nonfunctioning pNENs do not secrete hormones that cause symptoms, they often continue to grow undetected. When nonfunctioning pNENs are eventually detected, they are often quite large. More than half are metastasized upon diagnosis, usually because they remained undetected for so long.
As nonfunctioning pNENs grow they may eventually cause symptoms, most often related to their size and specific location. The most common symptom associated with nonfunctioning pNENs is abdominal pain and, in some cases, an abdominal mass may be present. Affected individuals may also have a variety of additional nonspecific symptoms including nausea, diarrhea, indigestion and unintended weight loss. Additional symptoms are caused by the size and bulk of a tumor, which can cause obstruction or compression of nearby structures. Some individuals may have yellowing of the skin (icterus) and whites of the eyes (jaundice). Nonfunctioning pNENs can potentially bleed into the gastrointestinal tract.
SYMPTOMATC NEOPLASMSThe symptoms of so called functioning pNENs can vary widely from one person to another, depending upon the specific subtype present and the specific hormone that is overproduced. Some pNENs may secrete more than one hormone, but usually one hormone is produced more than the others. Most individuals usually only have symptoms relating to the hormone that is chiefly produced.
InsulinomasThese neoplasms are mostly small and 90 percent of them behave benign. They are the most common form of pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms. Insulinomas produce insulin, a hormone that helps to regulate blood sugar levels by promoting the movement of glucose (a simple sugar) into cells for energy production or into the liver and fat cells for storage. The most common symptom of insulinomas is low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) and slow gain of weight, which can be present for years before a diagnosis is made. Untreated hypoglycemia can cause headaches, visual disturbances, personality changes, seizures and, in severe cases, coma and death.
Insulinomas can cause additional symptoms including irritability, confusion, weakness, tremors, loss of muscular coordination (ataxia), palpitations, a rapid heartbeat (tachycardia) and excessive sweating (diaphoresis).Therapy of choice is an enucleation of the insulinoma, which is a small pancreas protective operation.
GastrinomasThese tumors produce the hormone gastrin, which stimulates the stomach to release too much acid. Gastrinomas can cause abdominal pain, diarrhea, excess fat in the feces (steatorrhea), backflow of the contents of the stomach into the esophagus (gastroesophageal reflux) and erosions on the lining of the stomach (peptic ulcers). These lesions may bleed. Peptic ulcers can also cause an intense, burning sensation in the stomach that may last from a few minutes to several hours. In individuals with gastrinomas, peptic ulcers may keep coming back even after treatment. More than 50 percent of gastrinomas are malignant and can potentially spread (metastasize).
The symptoms caused by gastrinomas have been classified as a specific syndrome known as Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. (For more information on this disorder, choose “Zollinger Ellison” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
GlucagonomasThese tumors produce the hormone glucagon, which increases the amount of glucose in the blood. Glucose is a simple sugar. Too much sugar in the blood is known as hyperglycemia. Glucagonomas can cause a distinct skin rash (dermatitis) usually on the face, stomach or legs. Mild diabetes may also develop. Some affected individuals may develop blood clots, especially in the lungs potentially causing shortness of breath, cough or pain in the chest. Blood clots in extremities may cause deep vein thrombosis, a condition in which blood clots form in the legs causing the legs to become painful and swollen.
In addition, anemia, unintended weight loss, and inflammation or sores on the mucous membrane lining the inside of the mouth (stomatitis) have also been associated with glucagonomas. Glucagonomas tend to grow quite large and approximately 70 percent are malignant with the potential to spread (metastasize).
VIPomasThese tumors produce the hormone vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, which increases secretions from the intestines and relaxes certain muscles within the gastrointestinal tract. VIPomas can cause large amounts of chronic, watery diarrhea that can eventually result in dehydration, unintended weight loss, and loss of potassium in body (hypokalemia). Additional symptoms may occur including abdominal pain and cramping, lethargy, nausea, and flushing or redness of the face.
Many VIPomas are malignant by the time they are first diagnosed and often have already spread (metastasized). VIPomas and their associated symptoms may also be known as Verner-Morrison syndrome or pancreatic cholera.
SomatostatinomasThese tumors produce the hormone somatostatin, which inhibits the secretion of other hormones. Somatostatinomas can cause excessive glucose (hyperglycemia) levels in the blood. Additional symptoms that can develop include diabetes mellitus, gallstones (cholelithiasis), diarrhea, unintended weight loss and excess levels of fat in the feces (steatorrhea). Additional symptoms include abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Most somatostatinomas are large and have spread (metastasized) upon diagnosis.
ACTHomasThese tumors produce the hormone adrenocorticotropin, which stimulates the adrenal glands to overproduce cortisol. Cortisol is a hormone that is release in response to stressful situations. Cortisol increases blood pressure and blood sugar and inhibits the immune system. ACTHomas can result in Cushing’s syndrome, a disorder characterized by excessive amounts of weight gain (central obesity). Affected individuals may have a round, moon-shaped face, thin, fragile skin that bruises easily, high blood pressure (hypertension), generalized muscle weakness, behavioral changes, facial flushing, and weakened bones that fracture easily (osteoporosis). (For more information, choose “Cushing’s” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
GRFomasThese tumors produce the hormone growth hormone release factor, which stimulates the production of growth hormone. GRFomas can result in acromegaly, a disorder characterized by abnormal enlargement of bones of the arms, legs and head. (For more information, choose “acromegaly” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
Additional pNENsSome extremely rare pNENs include PPHrPomas, which secrete parathyroid hormone-related protein and may cause hyperparathyroidism; calcitoninomas, which secrete calcitonin and can cause watery diarrhea and facial flushing; and neurotensinomas, which can cause low blood pressure (hypotension), flushing, diarrhea, unintended weight loss, and diabetes. PPoma secrete pancreatic polypeptide, but usually do not cause any discernable symptoms.

