Papillitis

synonyms:
Optic Nerve Papillitis

overview:
Papillitis, also known as optic neuritis, is characterized by inflammation and deterioration of the portion of the optic nerve known as the optic disk. Also referred to as the “blind spot,” the optic disk (optic papilla) is that portion of the optic nerve that enters the eye and joins with the nerve-rich membrane lining the eye (retina). The optic nerves are the pair of nerves (second cranial nerves) that transmit impulses from the retina to the brain. Individuals with papillitis experience loss of vision in one eye that may occur within several hours of onset. The severity of visual impairment may vary from case to case, ranging from slight visual deficiency to complete loss of light perception. In addition, affected individuals experience a reduction in color perception. In some cases, spontaneous recovery may occur. However, in other cases, permanent visual impairment may result if the underlying cause is not detected or treated. Papillitis may occur for unknown reasons, after a viral illness, or due to or in association with a number of different underlying disorders or other factors.

symptoms:
The symptoms of papillitis include loss of vision, pain in the eye, and interference with accurate color vision (dyschromatopsia).
Individuals with papillitis usually experience unilateral loss of vision.  That is, they lose sight in one eye (about 70% of cases), usually within a short time (a few hours) of having become aware of diminished sight.  This condition is usually rapidly progressive.
The intensity of vision impairment varies from case to case, ranging from slight visual deficiency to complete loss of light perception. In addition, affected individuals experience a reduction in color perception.  In some cases, spontaneous recovery may occur.  However, in other cases, permanent visual impairment may result if the underlying cause is not detected or treated.  Papillitis may occur for unknown reasons, after a viral illness, or due to or in association with a number of different underlying disorders or other factors.

