Papillon Lefèvre Syndrome

synonyms:
keratoris palmoplantaris with periodontopathiaPLS

overview:
Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome (PLS) is an extremely rare genetic disorder that typically becomes apparent from approximately one to five years of age. PLS is characterized by the development of dry scaly patches on the skin of the palms and the soles (palmar-plantar hyperkeratosis) in association with severe inflammation and degeneration of the structures surrounding and supporting the teeth (periodontium). The primary (deciduous) teeth frequently become loose and fall out by about age five. Without treatment, most of the secondary (permanent) teeth may also be lost by approximately age 17. Additional symptoms and findings associated with PLS may include frequent pus-producing (pyogenic) skin infections, abnormalities of the nails (nail dystrophy), and excessive perspiration (hyperhidrosis). Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. It results from changes (alterations) of theCTSCgene that regulates production of an enzyme known as cathepsin C.

symptoms:
Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome is characterized by the development of dry scaly patches of skin (hyperkeratosis) usually around the age of one to five years. These patches are usually confined to the undersides of the hands and feet, but may spread to the knees and elbows. Rarely, the upper portions of the hands and feet, the eyelids, the lips, the cheeks, and/or other areas of the body may also be affected. Affected skin may be unusually red and thick, but can vary in color and texture. Skin lesions may worsen in the cold and walking may be painful. In rare instances, cysts may form on the eyelids later in life.
In affected individuals the teeth usually appear to form and erupt normally. However, most affected individuals exhibit chronic severe inflammation and degeneration of the tissues that surround and support the teeth (gingivitis and periodontitis). The gums and the underlying ligaments and bone that support the teeth are usually involved. When the baby (deciduous or primary) teeth erupt, these areas become red, swell, and bleed (gingivitis). The mouth may become inflamed (stomatitis), lymph nodes may swell (regional adenopathy), and pockets may form in the gums causing susceptibility to infections. Notable bad breath, called halitosis, may develop. Chewing may be very painful. The thickened ridge of bone in which the teeth rest (alveolar process) may break down (alveolar bone lysis). The baby teeth frequently become loose and fall out by the age of four or five. Afterward, the inflammation may be reduced and the gums may appear healthier. However, without treatment, most of the adult (permanent) teeth may be lost in the same manner by the age of 16. Both baby and adult teeth are usually affected in the order of their eruption. Some affected individuals will only have mild periodontal disease, and/or will have later onset of periodontal disease.
Affected individuals may have frequently recurring, pus producing (pyogenic) skin infections. Some individuals may be at risk for other infections including liver abscesses, Infection of hair follicles (furunculosis), respiratory tract infections, and hidradenitis supportiva, a condition characterized by swollen, painful lesions occurring in the armpit, groin, anal and breast regions.
Most individuals have fragile nails that may easily break off. Hair on the scalp and body may be sparse (hypotrichosis). Some individuals may develop excessive amounts of keratin in hair follicles causing rough, cone-shaped bumps (papules) on the skin. Affected individuals may also exhibit excessive perspiration (hyperhidrosis) associated with an unpleasant (malodorous) odor. Some individuals experience the accumulation of calcium with the skull causing the affected tissue to harden (intracranial calcification).

