Paramyotonia Congenita

synonyms:
Eulenburg diseaseparalysis periodica paramyotonicaparamyotonia congenita of von EulenburgPMCVon Eulenburg's disease

overview:
Summary
Paramyotonia congenita (PMC) is a rare non-progressive genetic disorder that affects the skeletal muscles. The disorder typically begins in infancy or early childhood. Affected individuals experience spells of muscle stiffness or when the muscles do not relax after contracting (myotonia). Symptoms can be triggered by exposure to the cold or after physical activity. The stiffness most commonly affects the muscles in the neck, face, arms and hands, however it can occur in the lower back and the muscles used for breathing. The stiffness of the muscles can get worse with repeated movements. There are also intermittent periods of a type of muscle weakness in which there is no muscle tone (flaccid paresis). This condition does not necessarily coincide with exposure to cold temperatures or myotonia. There is generally no wasting (atrophy) of muscles; however, there is often increase in bulk (hypertrophy) of muscles with this disorder. There is no cure to PMC; however, with the proper management of diet, lifestyle and medication, patients can lead normal lives. PMC is an autosomal dominant genetic condition caused by a mutation in the muscle sodium channel geneSCN4A.
Introduction
PMC is classified as a form of periodic paralyses, a group of muscle disorders characterized by irregular episodes of muscle weakness or stiffness. PMC was first discussed in 1886 by von Eulenburg. It is considered the first recognized temperature-sensitive condition in humans.

symptoms:
Muscle stiffness in PMC is the inability for the muscles to relax in a timely manner after contracting (myotonia). The muscles most commonly affected are located in the face, neck and upper extremities, although it can affect the muscles used for breathing and swallowing, as well as muscles in the lower back. PMC is usually apparent during infancy and always presents by teenage years. Symptoms do not progress with age. Individuals with this disorder do not have wasting of muscles (atrophy) but often have an increase of muscle bulk (hypertrophy).
The severity of the muscle stiffness depends on the individual; some patients experience painful myotonia, while others experience painless myotonia. This condition becomes worse with exposure to cold and alleviated by warm temperatures. In addition, it can become more severe with exercise. Sudden overexertion can trigger muscle stiffness and overall weakness that can take several days to completely resolve. PMC can make small everyday activities difficult, such as letting go of small objects (e.g. pens or door knobs).
Some episodes of muscle stiffness can coincide with potassium intake; affected individuals are instructed to avoid certain food products rich in potassium.
Some patients with more severe PMC can experience shortness of breath or tightness in their chest muscles.

