Paracoccidioidomycosis

synonyms:
Lobo DiseaseLutz-Splendore-Almeida DiseaseParacoccidioidal GranulomaPCMSouth American Blastomycosis

overview:
Paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM) is a chronic infectious tropical disease caused by the fungus Paracoccidioides brasiliensis. The initial infection usually occurs in the lungs, but may also spread to the skin, mucous membranes, and other parts of the body. Specialized cells that line the walls of blood and lymphatic vessels and dispose of cellular waste (reticuloendothelial system) may also be affected by paracoccidioidomycosis. If the patient does not receive treatment, life-threatening complications can occur. Most cases of this disease occur in South and Central America.

symptoms:
The symptoms of paracoccidioidomycosis generally occur from several weeks or months to years after the initial exposure to the fungus.  The symptoms vary according to which areas of the body are infected.
The symptoms of pulmonary paracoccidioidomycosis, in which the lungs are affected, may include cough, difficulty breathing (dyspnea), fatigue, and/or chest pain.  Adults with this form of the disorder may also have fibrous and degenerative changes in the lungs that cause the progressive loss of lung function (emphysema).  In some people, the symptoms of paracoccidioidomycosis progress to a condition known as cor pulmonale.  Heart disease occurs in this condition because of abnormally high blood pressure within the vessels that move blood away from the lungs and toward the heart.
In mucocutaneous paracoccidioidomycosis, ulcers (granulomatous lesions) appear on the mucous membranes, especially those of the mouth and nose.
When paracoccidioidomycosis affects the lymphatic system, generalized swelling of lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy) may occur in many areas of the body, especially in the neck and the underarm area (axilla).  Infected lymph nodes may become painful and produce pus (suppuration).
In visceral paracoccidioidomycosis, other organs of the body may also be infected including the liver, spleen, and/or intestines.  The adrenal glands may be particularly susceptible to this infection.  Chronic adrenal involvement may cause abnormally low levels of adrenal hormones.

