Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria

synonyms:
PNH

overview:
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is a rare disorder in which red blood cells break apart prematurely. It is an acquired hematopoietic stem cell disorder. Hematopoietic stem cells are created in the bone marrow, the spongy center of the long bones of the body. These cells grow and eventually develop into red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets. Some hematopoietic stem cells in individuals with PNH are defective and consequently produce defective blood cells. These defective red blood cells of PNH are extremely susceptible to premature destruction by a particular part of a person’s own immune system called the complement system. The destruction of red blood cells (hemolysis) by complement leads to episodes of hemoglobin in the urine (hemoglobinuria). Hemoglobin is the red, iron-rich, oxygen-containing pigment of the blood. Individuals with hemoglobinuria may exhibit dark-colored or blood colored urine. This finding is most prominent in the morning, after the urine has concentrated overnight during sleep. However, hemolysis in individuals with PNH is a constant process (i.e., it does not occur only at night). Hemoglobin in the urine may not always be visible. In addition to hemolysis, individuals with PNH are also susceptible to developing repeated, potentially life-threatening blood clots (thromboses). Affected individuals also have some degree of underlying bone marrow dysfunction. Severe bone marrow dysfunction results in low levels of red and white blood cells and platelets (pancytopenia). The specific symptoms of PNH vary greatly from one person to another and affected individuals usually do not exhibit all the symptoms associated with the disorder.

symptoms:
The symptoms of PNH occur because of the production of defective blood cells and because the bone marrow does not produce enough blood cells. The specific symptoms and progression of the disorder vary greatly from one person to another. Some individuals may have mild symptoms that remain stable for many years; others may have serious symptoms that can progress to cause life-threatening complications.
It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
The premature destruction of red blood cells (hemolysis) is the primary clinical finding associated with PNH. Hemolysis may result in hemoglobin in the urine, although many individuals with hemolysis do not have visible hemoglobin in the urine. When hemolysis occurs, a red blood cell’s outer wall (membrane) breaks down (lysis) releasing hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is excreted from the body in the urine, resulting in the dark-colored or blood colored urine (hemoglobinuria) that is characteristic of this disorder. Hemolysis is ongoing, but may worsen (i.e., a person may have a hemolytic episode) during periods of infection, trauma or stress. The premature destruction of red blood cells may result in low levels of circulating red blood cells (hemolytic anemia) that is made worse by the underlying bone marrow dysfunction.
Chronic hemolysis is central to all the symptoms and physical findings associated with PNH. Mild hemolysis can cause fatigue, rapid heartbeat, headaches, chest pain and difficulty breathing when exercising. If hemolysis is severe, additional symptoms can develop, including disabling fatigue, difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) and painful contractions that affect the abdomen, the esophagus (esophageal spasms) and, in men, can cause erectile dysfunction and impotence. Chronic hemolysis can also lead to the development of blood clots and some affected individuals may develop acute and chronic kidney (renal) disease.
Approximately 15-30 percent of individuals with PNH develop blood clots, especially in the veins (venous thrombosis). The exact reason individuals with PNH develop blood clots is not fully understood. In addition to red blood cells, defective hematopoietic stem cells may also produce defective platelets. Some researchers believe that these defective platelets are abnormally prone to forming blood clots. Chronic hemolysis may also contribute to the development of blood clots. Blood clots can be carried via the bloodstream to various areas of the body, potentially resulting in life-threatening complications. Blood clots may reduce or cut off blood flow to various organs, especially the stomach, liver, and brain. The specific symptoms associated with venous thrombosis depend upon the specific area of the body affected. For example, blood clots affecting the liver may result in jaundice, abdominal pain, or, potentially, a condition known as Budd-Chiari syndrome (for more information, see the Related Disorders section below). Blood clots affecting the stomach and bowels may result in a sharp pain in the abdomen or a bloated or full feeling. Blood clots affecting cerebral veins may cause symptoms such as headaches or problems with cognition (thinking). Blood clots in the lungs can result in shortness of breath, difficulty breathing and heart palpitations. In rare cases, blood clots may form in the arteries. Blood clots can potentially cause life-threatening complications by cutting off blood flow to vital organs.
All patients with PNH have some degree of bone marrow dysfunction. Individuals with mild bone marrow dysfunction may not have any symptoms or only mild symptoms. Individuals with severe bone marrow dysfunction may have low levels of red and white blood cells and platelets (pancytopenia). Red blood cells deliver oxygen to the body, white blood cells help in fighting off infections and platelets allow the body to form clots to stop bleeding. A low level of circulating red blood cells is known as anemia. A low level of white blood cells is known as leukopenia. A low level of platelets is known as thrombocytopenia.
Individuals with anemia may experience tiredness, increased need for sleep, weakness, lightheadedness, dizziness, irritability, headaches, pale skin color, difficulty breathing (dyspnea) and cardiac symptoms, including chest pain. Individuals with leukopenia have an increased risk of contracting bacterial and fungal infections. Individuals with thrombocytopenia are more susceptible to excessive bruising following minimal injury and spontaneous bleeding from the mucous membranes, especially those of the gums and nose. Women may develop increased menstrual blood loss (menorrhagia).
Many individuals with PNH may simultaneously have another, closely related disorder known as acquired aplastic anemia. To a lesser extent, some individuals may have myelodysplasia. Although the exact relationship among these disorders is unknown, researchers now believe that PNH arises from autoimmune bone marrow failure, which is the cause of most cases of acquired aplastic anemia and some cases of myelodysplasia. In rare cases, PNH may eventually develop into acute leukemia. The reason for this transformation is unknown. (For more information on these disorders, see the Related Disorders section below.)

