Parry Romberg Syndrome

synonyms:
hemifacial atrophy (HFA)progressive facial hemiatrophyprogressive hemifacial atrophyPRSRomberg syndrome

overview:
Parry-Romberg syndrome is a rare, acquired disorder characterized by slowly progressive shrinkage (atrophy) of the skin and soft tissues of half of the face (hemifacial atrophy). In rare cases, both sides of the face are affected. In some people, atrophy may also affect the limbs, usually on the same side of the body as the facial atrophy.
The severity and specific symptoms of Parry-Romberg syndrome are highly variable from one person to another. Additional symptoms can potentially develop in some people including neurological abnormalities or abnormalities affecting the eyes or teeth.
Parry-Romberg syndrome usually becomes apparent during the first decade of life or early during the second decade but does occur in adulthood. Most individuals with Parry-Romberg syndrome experience symptoms before the age of 20 years.
The exact cause of Parry-Romberg syndrome is unknown and appears to occur randomly for unknown reasons (sporadically).
Diagnosis is based on the signs and symptoms.
There is currently no cure or specific treatment. The treatment of Parry-Romberg syndrome is directed toward the specific symptoms that are apparent in each affected person.

symptoms:
The symptoms, progression and severity of Parry-Romberg syndrome are highly variable from one person to another and range from mild to severe. It is important to note that affected individuals will not have all the symptoms discussed below. It seems likely that individuals with milder symptoms are much more common than severely affected individuals. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case and associated symptoms.
The characteristic symptom of Parry-Romberg syndrome is thinning or shrinkage (atrophy) of various tissues of the face including fat, skin, connective tissues, muscle and, in some people, bone. The degree of atrophy can vary widely, ranging from mild, barely perceptible changes to significant asymmetry in which one side of the face appears “sunken in”. The progression of atrophic changes can vary as well. Facial atrophy may progress slowly over many years before stopping. If the atrophy stops progressing, it may occasionally reactivate later in life, but this is rare. In other people, the atrophy may progress indefinitely. In some people, when Parry-Romberg syndrome starts at an early age, the progression seems to accelerate more quickly than when it starts later in life.
The initial facial changes associated with Parry-Romberg syndrome usually occur near the middle portion of the face such as the cheek area above the upper jawbone (maxilla) or between the nose and the upper corner of the lip. As the disease process continues, the upper face (e.g., the areas around the eye, the eyebrow and the ear) as well as the angle of the mouth and the lower jawbone (mandible) usually are affected. In some people, one half of the chin may also be involved.
Many individuals have an unusual bony depression or hollow in the forehead or upper domed portion of the skull, the bony cavity that accommodates the eye (orbit) and/or the lower jawbone (mandible).
In some people, a “line” may form in the area where the atrophic changes on one side of the face meet the normal, unaffected skin on the other side of the face. In some people, this “line” may be very distinct and runs either vertically or diagonally down the forehead. The abnormal skin is thickened and hardened (sclerosis). This condition may be referred to as linear scleroderma “en coup de sabre” (LSCS–this comes from the French for ‘sabre cut’) and it can occur by itself as an isolated finding.
According to medical literature, LSCS is either a separate disorder that overlaps to a large degree with Parry-Romberg syndrome or essentially the same disorder (i.e., different expressions of one disease process or spectrum of disease)The exact relationship of LCSC and Parry-Romberg syndrome is not fully understood but it’s clear that the two commonly occur together. About one third of people with linear scleroderma on the head or neck have Parry-Romberg syndrome
Other features may include:
Ear abnormalities (rarely) caused by progressive atrophic changes, characterized by the ear on the affected side becoming misshapen and unusually small and protruding from the head due to loss of supporting tissueAnomalies of the arm, trunk and legs on one side of the body, either the same side (ipsilateral) as the atrophic changes to the face or the opposite side (contralateral) due to the progression of the associated atrophic skin and soft tissue changesAbnormalities of the hair on the affected side (in many cases) including:Development of abnormal bald patches on the scalp (alopecia)Absence of eyelashesAbsence of the middle portion of the eyebrowWhitening (blanching) of the hair (in some people, such hair changes may occur before other abnormalities associated with the disorder)Abnormalities of the mouth and teeth including:Atrophy of half (hemiatrophy) of the upper lip and/or one side of the tongueShortening of portions of the lower jawbone (mandible) on the affected sideJaws that may be prone to spontaneous fractureThe unaffected side of the mouth and nose may sometimes point (deviate) towards the affected sideSome affected individuals may have difficulty opening or closing their jawsInvoluntary contractions of muscles used in chewing (hemi-masticatory spasm or trismus) may occurOne side of the upper lip may have an unusually twisted or raised appearance and certain teeth may be abnormally exposed, erupt unusually late and/or have atrophic rootsThe upper and lower teeth may meet inappropriately (malocclusion)Neurological symptoms that may include:Headaches and migraine headaches (severe headaches accompanied by visual symptoms, light sensitivity, nausea and vomiting) that may be of long duration and have associated pupillary abnormalities (the black part of the eye)Seizures (in about 1 in 10 affected people) usually characterized by jerky movements of muscles on the side of the body not affected by hemifacial atrophy (called contralateral focal seizures,) that may spread up or down a limbThe seizures typically begin within 3 years of the onset of the symptomsAbnormal sensations (such as prickling or burning sensations called paresthesia) in the facial area and/or episodes of severe pain in the facial areas supplied by the fifth cranial nerve (trigeminal nerve) including the mouth, cheek, nose and/or other areas (trigeminal neuralgia)Spasm of the jaw (trismus), typically on the same side as the hemiatrophy, which may be helped with botulinum toxin therapy (Botox)Weakness of the opposite side of the hemiatrophy.Skin problems including:Abnormal darkening or fading of the skin overlying the affected areas (hyper- and hypopigmentation) that may appear before the atrophic symptoms in some peoplePatches of skin on the arms, legs and/or trunk that have similar pigmentation abnormalities (rarely)Vitiligo, a skin condition in which loss of color (pigmentation) of areas of skin results in the development of abnormal white patchesEye (ocular) abnormalities that may include:Loss of fat lining the cavity that accommodates the eye (orbit) and loss of bone from the orbit may cause the eye to have sunken appearance (enophthalmos)Displacement of the eyeball farther back in the eye socket than normal (globe retraction)Reduction in eye size (globe atrophy)Drooping of the upper eyelid (ptosis)Different colored eyes (heterochromia)Difficulty closing the eye (lagophthalamos)Inflammation of the retina (retinitis)Inflammation of the uvea (uveitis) – the iris and middle part of the eyeDouble vision (diplopia) if the nerves that control eye muscles are involvedAnxiety and depression because of the effect on facial appearanceHigher chance of having other autoimmune conditions

