Parsonage Turner Syndrome

synonyms:
acute brachial neuritisbrachial neuritisbrachial plexus neuritisbrachial plexus neuropathyidiopathic brachial plexus neuropathyneuralgic amyotrophyPTS

overview:
Summary
Parsonage-Turner syndrome (PTS) is an uncommon neurological disorder characterized by rapid onset of severe pain in the shoulder and arm. This acute phase may last for a few hours to a few weeks and is followed by wasting and weakness of the muscles (amyotrophy) in the affected areas. PTS involves mainly the brachial plexus, the networks of nerves that extend from the spine through the neck, into each armpit and down the arms. These nerves control movements and sensations in the shoulders, arms, elbows, hands and wrists. Other nerves in the arm or even the leg can also be involved. The exact cause of PTS is unknown, but it is thought to be caused by an abnormality of the immune system (immune-mediated disorder). The severity of the disorder can vary widely from one individual to another due, in part, to the specific nerves involved. Affected individuals may recover without treatment, meaning that strength returns to the affected muscles and pain goes away. However, individuals may experience recurrent episodes. Some affected individuals may experience residual pain and potentially significant disability.
Introduction
The initial descriptions of this disorder in the medical literature date back to the late 1800s. In 1948, Drs. Parsonage and Turner were the first physicians to describe a large series of patients. They termed the disorder ‘amyotrophic neuralgia’. There is an extremely rare, inherited form known as hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy, on which NORD has a separate report. Sometimes PTS is referred to as idiopathic neuralgic amyotrophy to distinguish it from the genetic form and to denote that the cause is unknown. However, usually PTS is simply referred to as neuralgic amyotrophy. PTS can be broadly classified as a form of peripheral neuropathy or disorder of the peripheral nervous system, which encompasses any disorder that primarily affects the nerves outside the central nervous system (i.e. brain and spinal cord).

symptoms:
The hallmark finding of PTS is the abrupt onset of pain in one of the shoulders (unilateral pain). In rare cases, both shoulders can be affected (bilateral). Onset may be rapid in some people, while in others pain onset is gradual and subtle (insidious), followed by a rapid increase in both intensity and severity. Pain has been described as sharp, aching, burning or stabbing. Pain may also affect the neck and the arm and hand on the same side as the affected shoulder.
It is important to note that PTS is a highly variable disorder, and one person’s individual case may not resemble another person’s experience. Some individuals (approximately 75%) will only have one episode, while others (approximately 25%) will have recurrent episodes. In addition, recurrent episodes may involve the same peripheral nerves that were originally affected, completely different peripheral nerves or a mix of the same and different peripheral nerves. The intensity, duration and location of pain can also differ greatly from one person to another.
Pain is often continuous, severe and worse during the evening or at night. Pain can potentially be excruciating and debilitating. This initial period may be known as the acute phase. Eventually, affected individuals enter a period where the continuous pain lessens and there may be no pain when the affected shoulder and/or arm are not being used (i.e. at rest). However, specific movements may aggravate the condition, causing sharp, stabbing intense pain that persists for a few hours before lessening. This occurs because previously damaged nerves remain abnormally sensitive (hypersensitive). Eventually, affected individuals develop a chronic, low-grade pain that can persist for a year or longer, sometimes known as the chronic phase.
Eventually, anywhere from a few days to a few weeks after the onset of the disorder, pain is replaced by progressive weakness of muscles in the affected shoulder. The severity of muscle weakness can vary greatly, ranging from mild weakness that may be barely noticeable to, in rare cases, almost complete paralysis of the affected muscles. In individuals with PTS, muscle weakness results from damage to the nerves that serve the muscles in the shoulders and arms. The degree of weakness is related to the number of nerves affected. In addition to weakness, the affected muscles may progressively shrink and thin (atrophy) due to lack of use. Muscle weakness may go unnoticed at first, until atrophy and wasting of the affected muscles progresses and is easy to observe.
Additional symptoms include absent or reduced reflexes and sensory deficits in the affected areas such as the loss of sensation or numbness (hypoesthesia), a sensation of tickling, prickling or burning on the skin of the affected areas (paresthesia) or an abnormally unpleasant or painful sensation to a light touch (dysesthesia).
Additional complications can develop in some people. The position of the shoulders, arms, wrists and hands can shift slightly because of atrophy and weakness of affected muscles. This can leave an affected individual at risk of secondary impingement or subluxation. Secondary impingement is a painful condition that occurs when the shoulder’s tendons are compressed or trapped during shoulder movements. Subluxation refers to partial dislocation of the shoulder joint. Affected individuals may also be at risk of developing contractures, in which abnormal shortening of muscles or tendons leads to deformity or rigidity of an affected joint. Contracture of the shoulder, also known as adhesive capsulitis, can result in pain and limitation of the normal range of movement of the joint.
In some people, nerves outside of the brachial plexus may be involved such as the nerves of the lumbosacral plexus, the phrenic nerve or the recurrent laryngeal nerve. Involvement of the nerves in the lower portion of the back (lumbosacral plexus) can cause pain, hypoesthesia and paresthesia in the legs. The phrenic nerve sends signals between the brain and the diaphragm, which is the muscle that separates the lungs from the abdomen. Involvement of the phrenic nerve can result in a significant shortness of breath. Involvement of the recurrent laryngeal nerve can result in weakness and partial paralysis of the vocal cords and, consequently, hoarseness and soft speech (hypophonia). In extremely rare cases, facial or other cranial nerves may be affected.
Because nerve damage in PTS can affect blood vessels additional symptoms may develop including affected skin, particularly on the hands, becoming reddened, purplish or spotted. Swelling due to fluid retention (edema) may also occur. The skin, hair and nails may grow more quickly than normal. Certain areas of the body, particularly the hands and forearms may no longer be able to respond properly to outside temperature. Excessive sweating may occur or affected individuals may feel abnormally cold in the affected areas.
Some individuals may recover full strength and functional levels of the shoulder or affected areas. Numerous reports in the medical literature state that most individuals will regain up to 70-90% of their original strength and functional levels within two years. However, recent studies indicate that this can take more than two years in some people, while other people will experience residual, chronic pain and complications such as impaired movement of the shoulder and/or affected joints. In severe cases, affected individuals can be left with significant disability that can impact their ability to work and perform common tasks.

