Pars Planitis

synonyms:
Intermediate Uveitis (UI)Peripheral Retinal InflammationPPVitritis

overview:
Although pars planitis is generally benign, there can be significant vision loss in extreme cases. It is an immunological disorder of the eye characterized by inflammation of a part of the uvea, the layer of tissue between the sclera and the retina, the membranes protecting the eyeball. The uvea, in turn, is made up of three portions: the iris, the ciliary body, and the choroid. In addition, the uvea contains many of the blood vessels that supply the eye.
The pars plana is a narrow section of the ciliary body, inflammation of which is known as pars planitis. In association with the inflammation or immunological response, fluid and cells infiltrate the clear gelatin-like substance (vitreous humor) of the eyeball, near the retina and/or pars plana. As a result, swelling of the eye or eyes can also occur, but more importantly blurred vision and progressive increase in the vision of floaters is reported as main symptoms by patients suffering this condition as a result of the infiltration of the vitreous humor.
The inflammation occurs in the intermediate zone of the eye; that is, between the anterior part(s) of the eye (iris) and the posterior part(s), the retina and/or choroid. It has therefore been designated as one of the diseases of a family of intermediate uveitis.
In some cases, the disturbance of vision may be slightly progressive.

symptoms:
The symptoms of pars planitis include blurred vision and dark floating spots that intrude upon clarity of eyesight. Swelling can occur inside the eye, particularly on the peripheral retina or macula that may lead to decreased vision. Glaucoma may occur as well.
The clinical picture may be complicated by cataracts, retinal detachment, or fluid within the retina (macular edema)
More often the examining ophthalmologist (specialist in diseases of the eye) will see clusters of white blood cells trapped within the eyeball that are called snowballs.  The term physicians may use for these is inflammatory exudate.  These are clusters of white blood cells trapped within the eyeball. If these clusters are located on the pars plana, they are known as snowbanks.

