Partial Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome

synonyms:
PAIStesticular feminization

overview:
Summary
Partial androgen insensitivity syndrome (PAIS) is genetic condition that affects the sexual development of a male fetus. During pregnancy, male fetuses with PAIS are unable to properly respond to male sex hormones (androgens). As a result, this affects the development of the genitals. The appearance of the genitals may vary from person to person. Some males have an unusually small penis (microphallus), undescended testes, hypospadias (urethra located on the underside of the penis), and/ or bifid scrotum (scrotum split in two). Others may have more female-appearing genitals and physical features, including a large clitoris (clitoromegaly), male breast development (gynecomastia), undescended testes, and/ or fusion of the labia. Individuals with PAIS typically have infertility. PAIS is caused by a change in the AR gene, which is located on the X chromosome. It is inherited through an X-linked recessive pattern and typically affects males. It is recommended that parents and caretakers work with an experienced healthcare team to evaluate a child with PAIS before assigning their sex. If the individual is reared as male, they may be given testosterone therapy to improve fertility and surgeries to repair structures of the penis and to reduce the size of the male breasts. If the individual is reared as female, they may be offered surgery to remove the male reproductive organs after puberty, followed by estrogen (female sex hormone) therapy.
Introduction
Androgen insensitivity occurs when a person’s body cannot respond properly to male sex hormones (androgens) during pregnancy. Partial androgen insensitivity syndrome (PAIS) belongs to a group of conditions that involves androgen insensitivity, including complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS) and mild androgen insensitivity syndrome (MAIS). The androgen insensitivity syndromes have historically been called “testicular feminization,” based on the appearance of the genitals. However, because the group of conditions vary from person to person based on one’s response to androgens, it is now referred as “androgen insensitivity.”

symptoms:
Characteristics of partial androgen sensitivity syndrome vary from person. Each person with PAIS is unique and may not have the same features.Some people with PAIS may have more female-appearing features. For example, some can be born with female-appearing genitals but may have an enlarged clitoris (clitoromegaly) or fusion of certain areas of the labia. In addition, some individuals may be born with openings of a female-appearing urethra (duct where urine is released from the bladder to outside the body) and vagina. However, individuals with PAIS do not have female sex organs such as a uterus and ovaries. Some people with this condition may have undescended testes, in which one or both testicles are not able to descend completely by puberty. Because they do not have ovaries and may have issues with the development of the testes, many people with PAIS are infertile, because they produce no or very little sperm. Also, some individuals with PAIS may develop breasts (gynecomastia) during puberty.
Other people with PAIS may have more male-appearing features. For example, some may develop a penis. Some affected males may be born with a small penis, which is usually less than 1 cm, and may look similar to a clitoris. Those who develop a penis may be born with a feature called hypospadias, in which the opening of the penis is on the underside. As a result, boys with hypospadias may have issues urinating in certain directions. During puberty, people with PAIS may also develop a bifid scrotum, in which their scrotum area may separated by a groove into two parts.

