PCSK1 Deficiency

synonyms:
obesity due to prohormone convertase deficiencyobesity and endocrinopathy due to impaired processing of prohormonesproprotein convertase 1/3 deficiencyproprotein convertase-1 deficiencyPC 1 deficiencyprohormone convertase 1 deficiency

overview:
Summary
PCSK1 deficiency is a very rare inherited disorder that affects the metabolism and appetite. Severe diarrhea, digestive problems and slow growth are the earliest symptoms, followed by extreme hunger and obesity in early childhood. Excessive thirst and frequent urination (polyuria polydipsia syndrome) are common. Other symptoms related to abnormalities of the endocrine glands include growth hormone deficiency, low thyroid hormone and adrenal gland disorders. Other symptoms include delayed puberty and low energy. PCSK1 deficiency is caused by changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in thePCSK1gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Diagnosis is based on a clinical examination, symptoms, laboratory testing and genetic testing. Treatment is available for this condition using a drug called setmelanotide.
Introduction
PCSK1 deficiency was first described in 1995. This condition is rare, making it difficult to predict exactly how it will affect someone who is newly diagnosed with this condition. It is one of several conditions that include early-onset obesity, and these conditions can be difficult to distinguish from each other without a careful physical examination and genetic testing.

symptoms:
The symptoms of PCSK1 deficiency are due to abnormalities of the endocrine glands. The endocrine glands make hormones that affect growth, sexual development, blood pressure and the way the body makes and uses energy. Babies with PCSK1 deficiency develop severe diarrhea and digestive problems in the first few months of life. Symptoms may last for several months and lead to poor growth and weight gain. Sometimes, the diarrhea is severe enough to lead to hospitalization. These symptoms eventually get better and other symptoms related to endocrine gland abnormalities develop. These include uncontrollable hunger and early-onset obesity which continues through adulthood. Other symptoms include the inability to absorb salt and water, causing extreme thirst (polydipsia) and frequent urination (polyuria). Other endocrine problems include low levels of sex hormones, thyroid gland insufficiency and growth hormone deficiency. Puberty may be delayed or absent. Adults with PCSK1 deficiency are shorter than average and obese.

