Pediatric Crohn’s Disease

overview:
Summary
Pediatric Crohn’s disease is a rare, inflammatory bowel disease characterized by severe, chronic inflammation of the intestinal wall or any portion of the gastrointestinal tract. The gastrointestinal tract is a group of organs that are connected by tubes that run from the mouth to the anus. The organs that make up the gastrointestinal tract are the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine and anus. The esophagus is the muscular tube that runs from the back of the throat to the stomach. The small intestine is a long, narrow, folded tube that extends from the stomach to the large intestine. It is the area where most of the digestion and absorption of nutrients occurs within the body. When the small intestine is damaged or lost (e.g., due to surgery), affected individuals may lose the ability to absorb enough water, vitamins, and other nutrients from food. The large intestine, also known as the colon, is a long, narrow folded tube that connects the small intestine to the anus. The large intestine absorbs water and minerals and is where the formation and temporary storage of solid waste (feces) occurs. The anus is a small opening at the end of the intestines through which solid waste exits the body. The last segment of the large intestine that connects to the anus is called the rectum. Pediatric Crohn’s disease can affect any area of the gastrointestinal tract.
The two areas most often affected are the ileum and the large intestine. The ileum is the last section of the small intestine and connects to the large intestine. Common symptoms often include diarrhea (sometimes bloody), abdominal pain, fever, and weight loss. In children, poor linear growth and lack of adequate weight gain can often be the presenting concerns; in these instances, proper diagnosis is often delayed. Symptoms may come and go (relapsing and remitting). Crohn’s disease is more commonly diagnosed in adults, but approximately 25% of patients are diagnosed as children and teenagers (pediatric population). Children and adolescents are less likely than adults to have disease that is limited to the small intestine. The exact cause of pediatric Crohn’s disease is not fully understood, but this is thought to develop because of multiple different factors occurring together including genetic, immunologic and environmental triggers.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms can vary from one person to another. Symptoms can appear suddenly, or they may build slowly over time. Symptoms may be triggered by trauma, illness or stress. Sometimes, symptoms occur with no identifiable triggering event.
Common symptoms of pediatric Crohn’s disease are cramping, abdominal pain and chronic episodes of watery diarrhea; blood may at times be seen in the diarrhea. Sometimes, affected individuals will have an urgent need to go to the bathroom and move their bowels. Some affected individuals may feel tired a lot and experience fever, nausea or loss of appetite. Loss of appetite may cause some children to fail to gain weight and grow as would be expected for their age and sex. Affected individuals may exhibit malnutrition because of reduced intake of calories, and some may have difficulty absorbing nutrients in the intestines (malabsorption). As a result, they may fall behind their peers in growth. Some children may experience a delay in reaching puberty.
Some affected children may develop bleeding within the gastrointestinal system. This bleeding may not be seen with the naked eye. Sometimes, anemia may develop. Anemia is a condition in which there are low levels of circulating red blood cells. Red blood cells deliver oxygen throughout the body. Anemia is associated with fatigue, pale skin color (pallor), lightheadedness and other symptoms.
About 30% of children and adolescents develop perianal disease, which affects the area around the anus. This can make it painful for children to go to the bathroom. Affected individuals may develop fissures or tears, abscesses or a fistula in the perianal region. A fistula is a small, abnormal passageway that connects the skin to the inside of the anus. Fistulae can be associated with abscesses. Some individuals develop skin tags, which are raised areas or bumps off of the anus.
Some affected children develop narrowing of the affected area of the gastrointestinal tract. Over time, scar tissue can form around the narrowing, resulting in a stricture. This can hinder or block the passage of food through the large or small intestine and cause obstruction. A bowel obstruction can cause cramping, vomiting, and constipation.

Extraintestinal Symptoms
Some affected individuals develop signs and symptoms outside of the gastrointestinal tract. These signs and symptoms may be called extraintestinal symptoms. About 40% of children or adolescents eventually develop lesions on or in the mouth, including lesions on the mucous membrane lining the inside of the mouth and on the gums (mucogingivitis), canker sores of the mouth (aphthous ulcers) or swelling.
In rare instances, children with pediatric Crohn’s disease develop lesions of the mouth and the perianal region, but with limited or mild intestinal disease.
There are additional symptoms that can occur in some children and adolescents with pediatric Crohn’s disease including an inflammatory skin condition called erythema nodosum, in which small, raised, reddish bumps develop on the skin. These bumps are often painful and occur most commonly on the shins. Some affected individuals may experience inflammation in the eyes, causing burning or itching eyes. Some affected individuals develop joint pain (arthralgia) or joint inflammation (arthritis).

