Pediatric Cardiomyopathy

overview:
Pediatric cardiomyopathy is a rare heart condition that affects infants and children. Specifically, cardiomyopathy means disease of the heart muscle (myocardium). Several different types of cardiomyopathies exist, and the specific symptoms vary from person to person. In some affected individuals, no symptoms may be present (asymptomatic); in many people, cardiomyopathy is a progressive condition that may result in an impaired ability of the heart to pump blood; fatigue; heart block resulting in a very slow heart rate (bradycardia); irregular or rapid heartbeats (tachycardia); and, potentially, heart failure and sudden cardiac death.
Cardiomyopathy may be termed ischemic or nonischemic. Ischemic cardiomyopathy refers to a lack of blood flow and oxygen (ischemia) to the heart and in pediatrics is due to a congenital abnormality of the blood vessels that supply the heart (coronary arteries). Nonischemic cardiomyopathy refers to structural damage or malfunction of the heart muscle due to causes other than coronary artery abnormalities. Nearly all patients with pediatric cardiomyopathy have the nonischemic type. This report deals with nonischemic pediatric cardiomyopathy.
Cardiomyopathy may also be termed primary or secondary. Primary cardiomyopathy occurs by itself (no other parts of the body are involved) due to a genetic abnormality or an external cause such as heart muscle inflammation (myocarditis) caused by viral or bacterial infections; exposure to certain toxins such as heavy metals or excessive alcohol use. Some disorders affect the heart in addition to additional organ systems and this is called secondary cardiomyopathy. According to the Pediatric Cardiomyopathy Registry, approximately 79 percent of pediatric cardiomyopathy is idiopathic (that is, the cause is unknown).
Cardiomyopathy has traditionally been divided into three basic subtypes based upon the specific changes within the heart. These subtypes are dilated, hypertrophic and restrictive. There are several other less common forms such as arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia, noncompaction and others where it is controversial whether they are subtypes of the three principal forms or should be considered as completely different diseases.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms of pediatric cardiomyopathy depend upon the type of cardiomyopathy present. Many individuals with cardiomyopathy will not exhibit any symptoms (asymptomatic) throughout life. Common symptoms of cardiomyopathy that may occur include fatigue, shortness of breath (dyspnea) especially with exertion and chest pain. Additional symptoms potentially associated with all forms of cardiomyopathy include irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias) such as abnormally fast (tachycardia) or slow (bradycardia) heartbeats. In some individuals, cardiomyopathy may progress to cause congestive heart failure, cardiac arrest and sudden death. Cardiomyopathy can be present at birth or have new onset at any age, and even in the presence of cardiomyopathy symptoms may or may not be present.
The normal heart has four chambers. The two upper chambers, known as atria, are separated from each other by a fibrous partition known as the atrial septum. The two lower chambers are known as ventricles and are separated from each other by muscular wall (the ventricular septum). Valves connect the atria (left and right) to their respective ventricles. The valves allow for blood to be pumped through the chambers and prevent the flow from going backwards. Blood travels from the right ventricle through the pulmonary artery to the lungs where it receives oxygen. The blood returns to the heart through pulmonary veins and enters the left ventricle. The left ventricle sends the now oxygen-filled blood into the main artery of the body (aorta). The aorta distributes the blood throughout the body.
The various forms of nonischemic cardiomyopathy occur because of structural damage and malfunction of the heart muscle itself. For most people with nonischemic cardiomyopathy, the main pumping chamber of the heart (left ventricle) is affected. However, the right ventricle and the atria may also become involved.
Dilated CardiomyopathyDilated cardiomyopathy is characterized by abnormal enlargement (dilatation) of the left and/or right ventricle because of a weakening of the heart muscle, reducing the strength of the pumping action. This results in a limited ability to circulate blood to the lungs and the rest of the body which may result in fluid buildup in the lungs and various body tissues, a condition known as congestive heart failure. In some individuals, all four chambers of the heart may be affected. Symptoms of congestive heart failure may depend upon an affected child’s age and other factors. In young children, for example, heart failure may manifest as fatigue and shortness of breath (dyspnea) upon exertion. Additional symptoms may include swelling of the legs and feet and, in some people, chest pain. Initial symptoms of dilated cardiomyopathy in infants and children may include irritability, a persistent cough, shortness of breath and poor feeding resulting in the failure to gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Affected individuals may also experience excessive sweating, fatigue, wheezing and paleness of the skin (pallor). More serious complications may include fainting episodes (syncope), abdominal pain, irregular heartbeats and fluid accumulation within the lungs (pulmonary congestion) resulting in a persistent cough.
Hypertrophic CardiomyopathyHypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a disease of the heart muscle characterized by abnormal thickening of the walls of the heart potentially resulting in obstruction of blood flow in and out of the heart. In most patients, the left ventricle is primarily affected. The symptoms of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy vary widely among affected individuals. In many cases, affected individuals have no symptoms. Affected infants and children may experience shortness of breath upon exertion, fatigue, excessive sweating and poor appetite and weight gain resulting in growth failure. As affected children age, they may experience chest pain or discomfort, irregular heartbeats, dizziness or fainting episodes (syncope) usually upon heavy exertion, and some eventually develop congestive heart failure and fluid accumulation within the lungs. In some cases, affected individuals may experience sudden cardiac arrest and, potentially, sudden death.
Restrictive CardiomyopathyRestrictive cardiomyopathy is extremely rare in children. In this form of cardiomyopathy, the muscular walls of the heart become stiff, impeding blood flow into the heart. Symptoms associated with restrictive cardiomyopathy in infants and children include shortness of breath, fatigue, chest pain and poor appetite and weight gain, resulting in growth failure. Additional symptoms may include fluid collection in the abdomen (ascites) and feet, congestion of the lungs and an abnormally large liver (hepatomegaly). Irregular heartbeats, the formation of blood clots and heart block may also occur. Restrictive cardiomyopathy may progress to cause congestive heart failure and sudden death.
Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular DysplasiaArrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia (ARVD) is a rare form of nonischemic cardiomyopathy in which the normal muscular tissue of the right ventricle is replaced by fatty tissue and may also occasionally affect the left ventricle. The symptoms of ARVD vary greatly. Symptoms may develop during childhood, but in most people do not appear until their 30s or 40s. Symptoms associated with ARVD may include irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias), shortness of breath, swollen neck veins, abdominal discomfort and fainting episodes (syncope). In some patients, no symptoms are apparent until an affected individual goes into cardiac arrest and possibly sudden death.

