Peeling Skin Syndrome

synonyms:
deciduous skinfamilial continuous skin peelingskin peeling syndromeexfoliative ichthyosisPSS

overview:
Peeling skin syndrome (PSS) is a group of rare inherited skin disorders in which the normal gradual process of invisible shedding of the outermost skin layers is hastened and/or aggravated. PSS is characterized by painless, continual, spontaneous skin peeling (exfoliation) due to a separation of the outermost layer of the epidermis (stratum corneum) from the underlying layers. Other findings may include blistering and/or reddening of the skin (erythema) and itching (pruritus). Symptoms may be present from birth or appear in early childhood and are often exacerbated by friction, heat or other external factors. Based on the extent of skin involvement, PSS may involve the skin of the entire body (generalized form), or is limited to the extremities, mostly hands and feet (localized form). Generalized PSS can be distinguished into an inflammatory type which is associated with erythema, involves other organ systems and is more severe, and a milder, non-inflammatory type. PSS may be caused by disease-causing variants in multiple genes encoding proteins with crucial functions for cell-cell adhesion: structural proteins forming cell-cell adhesion points (desmosomes, corneodesmosomes) and inhibitors of epidermal proteases that control skin shedding.

symptoms:
Peeling skin syndrome belongs to the groups of congenital ichthyosis and skin fragility disorders with autosomal recessive inheritance. Most forms of PSS manifest at birth or during infancy with shedding or peeling of the outermost layer of the skin (horny layer, aka stratum corneum). Skin peeling occurs spontaneous, is painless, and may persist lifelong with gradual improvements. Often, affected individuals and/or their caregivers can remove sheets of skin manually, comparable to skin peeling after a severe sunburn.
Other findings associated with this disorder may include blistering and skin fragility, itching, short stature, and/or newly formed hairs that can be plucked out more easily than normal. Skin peeling is often exacerbated by mechanical irritation of the skin, heat, sweat or water exposure or other external factors.
In the localized types, individuals develop blisters and erosions on hands and feet at birth or during infancy, which is reminiscent of another blistering skin disorder, epidermolysis bullosa simplex. The generalized inflammatory types, such as SAM syndrome or Netherton syndrome may be associated with generalized inflammation of the skin (erythroderma) or localized thickened, red plaques (erythrokeratoderma), immunodysfunction with elevated IgE levels, allergies, and susceptibility to infections, failure to thrive or metabolic wasting. In some patients, these disorders may be life-threatening, especially during the newborn period. Due to the variable clinical presentations of PSS, its often mild features and gradual improvement with age, PSS may be underdiagnosed and underreported.

