Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease

synonyms:
PMDhypomyelinating leukodystrophy 1HLD1sclerosis, diffuse familial brain

overview:
Summary
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) is a rare X-linked genetic disorder affecting the central nervous system that is associated with abnormalities of the white matter of the brain and spinal cord. It is one of the leukodystrophies in which disease is due to abnormal development of one or more components (predominantly fats or proteins) that make up the white matter (myelin sheath) of the brain. The myelin sheath is the protective covering of the nerve and nerves cannot function normally without it. In PMD, many areas of the central nervous system may be affected, including the deep portions of the cerebrum (subcortical), cerebellum, brain stem and spinal cord. Signs may include the impaired ability to coordinate movement (ataxia), involuntary muscle spasms (spasticity) that result in slow, stiff movements of the legs, delays in reaching developmental milestones, late onset loss of motor abilities, and progressive deterioration of intellectual function. The neurologic signs of PMD are usually slowly progressive.
PMD is associated with abnormalities (mutations or variants) in the PLP1 gene. Several forms of the disorder have been identified including classic PMD; connatal (meaning “at birth”) PMD; transitional PMD; and PLP1 null syndrome (no PLP1 protein). Forms of complicated spastic paraparesis and pure spastic paraparesis (designated SPG2) and hypomyelination of early myelinating structures (HEMS) are also caused by variants of thePLP1gene.

symptoms:
The signs of PMD may vary widely from person to person. The signs of the classical form of PMD usually begin during early infancy, typically before 2 months of age. Initially, affected infants may fail to develop normal control of the head and eyes, specifically abnormal head bobbing and rapid, involuntary, jerky eye movements (nystagmus). Abnormally slow growth may also be an early sign. As affected infants and children age, additional signs may become apparent, including muscle tremors, weakness, facial grimacing, lack of muscle tone (hypotonia), impaired ability to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia), and/or impairment in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of muscular and mental activities (psychomotor retardation) including delays in reaching developmental milestones such as sitting, standing, and walking. Affected individuals may also develop involuntary muscle spasms (spasticity) that result in slow, stiff movements of the legs and potentially partial paralysis of the arms and legs (spastic quadriparesis); abnormal, permanent fixation of certain joints (contractures); progressive degeneration of the nerves that lead to the eyes (optic atrophy); and/or difficulty speaking (dysarthria). As some affected children age, nystagmus may disappear. Some children may also develop skeletal deformities secondary to the severe spasticity that typically develops over time.
The signs of connatal PMD are present at birth or are observed during the first few weeks of life. This form of the disorder is characterized by weakness, spasticity, high-pitched sound when breathing (stridor), nystagmus, and seizures. Severe difficulty while swallowing (dysphagia) may also occur, necessitating gastrostomy feeding. Affected infants may also exhibit deterioration of mental functions and failure to reach developmental milestones such as speaking and walking. The progression of this form of PMD is more rapid and severe than the classic form and is often fatal during childhood.
Transitional PMD is a form of disease that is intermediate between the classical and connatal forms. The signs are similar to those of the classical and connatal forms of the disorder. However, the rate of progression is faster than the classical form but slower than the connatal form.
The PLP1 null syndrome is characterized by mild spastic quadriparesis, mild ataxia, absence of nystagmus during infancy and a mild demyelinating peripheral neuropathy. Patients with this form typically learn to walk, but deteriorate more rapidly beginning in late adolescence or early adulthood. Female carriers of PMD-relatedPLP1variants may have mild to moderate signs of the disease. In some cases, these signs resolve with age.

