Pemphigus and Pemphigoid

overview:
Pemphigus and pemphigoid are rare autoimmune blistering diseases of the skin and/or mucous membranes. Pemphigus affects the outer layer of the skin (epidermis) and causes lesions and blisters that easily rupture. Pemphigoid affects a lower layer of the skin, between the epidermis and the dermis, creating tense blisters that do not break easily. Sometimes pemphigoid may look like hives or eczema without blisters.
The term “pemphigus” is used in a very specific way to describe blistering disorders caused by autoantibodies such as desmoglein 1 and desmoglein 3 that recognize components of the epidermis and lead to disruption of the intercellular junctions, loss of integrity and formation of blisters.
Pemphigoid is a group of subepidermal, blistering autoimmune diseases that primarily affect the skin, especially in the lower abdomen, groin and flexor surfaces of the extremities. Here, autoantibodies (anti-BPA-2 and anti-BPA-1) are directed against the basal layer of the epidermis and mucosa.
The patient’s immune system makes antibodies, which attack viruses and harmful bacteria. In the context of pemphigus and pemphigoid, the immune system is over-active, and antibodies instead attack healthy cells in the skin or mucous membranes. As a result, skin cells separate from each other, fluid collects between skin layers and blisters form and may cover a large area of skin.

symptoms:
There are several different types of pemphigus.
Pemphigus Vulgaris (PV)PV is the most common of these conditions. Blisters are soft and fragile and may form at the mouth first and then spread to the skin and even the genitals. Blisters are frequently painful but not itchy, and in the mouth make chewing and swallowing difficult. PV does not cause permanent scarring unless there is an infection associated with the sore.
Pemphigus Foliaceus (PF)PF is  a less severe type. Blisters may form on the scalp and face first and then spread to the chest and back. Blisters do not occur in the mouth. Blisters are not usually painful and are superficial and form crusts.
Pemphigus VegetansThis type results in thicker sores, mainly in the groin and under the arms.
IgA PemphigusThis type is caused by the IgA antibody binding to epidermal cell proteins. It may resemble pemphigus foliaceus or may appear as small pustules.
Paraneoplastic Pemphigus (PNP)PNP is associated with certain forms of cancer. Blisters form inside the mouth and may affect the lungs, leading to a fatal outcome. Sores of the mouth, lips and esophagus are almost always present and skin lesions of different types occur. PNP can affect the lungs. In some patients, the diagnosis will prompt doctors to search for a hidden tumor. In some patients, the tumor will be benign, and the disease will improve if the tumor is surgically removed.
Mucous Membrane Pemphigoid (MMP)MMP affects the eyes, mouth and throat. A clinical form called ocular cicatricial pemphigoid (OCP) can result in blindness if it involves the eyes and respiratory compromise if it involves the deeper parts of the throat.
Bullous Pemphigoid (BP)BP is frequently limited to the skin with blisters presenting predominantly on the abdomen, groin, back, arms and legs. The blisters may itch and be painful.
Gestational Pemphigoid (GP)GP is characterized by a blistering rash starting around the navel and spreading to the entire body, typically in the second or third trimester of pregnancy.
Epidermolysis Bullosa Acquisita (EBA)EBA involves a blistering rash on the skin and/or mucosal surfaces. Blisters are usually smaller than in pemphigoid.

