Penta X Syndrome

synonyms:
49, XXXXX chromosome constitution49, XXXXX karyotype49, XXXXX syndromepentasomy XXXXXX syndrome

overview:
Penta X syndrome is an extremely rare chromosomal disorder in which females have three extra X chromosomes. Typically, females have only two X chromosomes, resulting in a 46,XX karyotype. However, in those with penta X syndrome, there are a total of five X chromosomes, resulting in a karyotype of 49,XXXXX. The condition is typically characterized by moderate to severe intellectual disability, short stature, upslanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures), a flat nasal bridge, malformed ears, and a short neck with a low hairline. Penta X syndrome may also be characterized by mild angulation of the fifth finger (pinky) toward the fourth finger (ring finger) (clinodactyly) or permanent flexion (camptodactyly) of the fifth fingers, heart and/or kidney defects, and deficient development of the ovaries and uterus. The disorder results from random errors during the division of reproductive cells in one of the parents. While the exact incidence of this disorder is unknown, researchers believe it occurs in close to one in 85,000 live births, comparable to the male equivalence (49,XXXXY).

symptoms:
Penta X syndrome is characteristically associated with growth delays before birth (prenatal growth deficiency), failure to grow and gain weight at the expected rate after birth (failure to thrive), and short stature. In addition, infants and children with penta X syndrome typically have delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and physical activities (psychomotor deficits) and are affected by moderate to severe intellectual disability.
There are several physical features this disorder is characterized by, with the most common being short stature, facial differences and clinodactyly. Because penta X is so rare, there is still much unknown about the phenotype, and associated symptoms vary. It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below.
Females with 49,XXXXX typically have distinctive facial features. These often include a small head (microcephaly), a round face, upslanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures), a flat nasal bridge, low-set malformed ears, and/or a short neck with a low hairline. Some affected individuals may also have additional eye (ocular) abnormalities, such as widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism), vertical skin folds that may cover the eyes’ inner corners (epicanthal folds), drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis), and/or partial absence of tissue from the irides or the colored regions of the eyes (iris colobomas). Additional craniofacial features reported in association with penta X syndrome have included abnormal, rudimentary outgrowths of tissue in front of the external ears (preauricular tags), a small jaw (micrognathia), thick lips, and/or incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate).
Dental abnormalities have been reported in females with 49,XXXXX such as abnormal contact of the upper jaw teeth with those of the lower jaw (malocclusion), unusually shaped molars with large pulp spaces (taurodontism), and/or enamel defects, potentially resulting in premature loss of certain “baby” (deciduous or primary) teeth.
Females with penta X syndrome may have various musculoskeletal defects, such as abnormal fusion of the forearm bones (radioulnar synostosis), narrow shoulders, and/or unusually small hands with abnormal deviation (clinodactyly) or permanent flexion (camptodactyly) of the fifth fingers. Additional findings may include overlapping toes, a foot deformity in which the sole is turned inward (metatarsus varus), and/or an abnormality in which the knees are unusually close together and the space between the ankles is increased (“knock knees” [genua valga]). Some affected females also have overflexion, bending (i.e., hyperflexion), or dislocations of multiple joints, including those of the fingers, wrists, shoulders, elbows, and/or hips. Further, reports indicate that some affected individuals may have abnormal skin ridge patterns (dermatoglyphics) on the fingers and palms of the hands.
In some cases, penta X syndrome may be associated with certain structural malformations of the heart at birth (congenital heart defects). Such defects may include an abnormal opening in the fibrous partition (septum) that normally separates the two lower chambers of the heart (ventricular septal defect [VSD]), and/or patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). In PDA, the channel that is present between the aorta and the pulmonary artery during fetal development fails to close after birth, leaving an abnormal opening between the arteries and affecting the supply of oxygenated blood to body tissues.
Some females with penta X syndrome may also have certain kidney (renal) abnormalities, such as underdevelopment of the kidneys (renal hypoplasia) and/or a congenital abnormality in which the two kidneys are joined at the base (horseshoe kidney).
Less often, affected females may have an unusually small uterus, and/or deficient development of the ovaries. Delayed puberty has also been reported.

