PEPCK Deficiency

synonyms:
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase deficiency

overview:
PEPCK deficiency is an extremely rare disorder characterized by episodes of low blood sugar (hypoglycemia). It is a disorder of carbohydrate metabolism caused by a deficiency in the enzyme called phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase or PEPCK. This enzyme normally converts proteins and fats to glucose during times of fasting, in a process called gluconeogenesis. The glucose is used as a source of energy by the body. PEPCK deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
The treatment for this disorder is avoidance of fasting and consumption of extra carbohydrates during exercise, illness or other periods when the body needs additional sources of energy.

symptoms:
There are two forms of PEPCK deficiency: PEPCK1 deficiency (cytosolic) and PEPCK2 deficiency (mitochondrial).Both forms represent an inherited deficiency of the PEPCK enzymes. These enzymes are part of a process of converting proteins and fat to glucose (gluconeogenesis) that occurs primarily in the liver. This process is activated when dietary intake of glucose is insufficient, such as fasting or when extra energy is needed, such as during periods of intense exercise. Glucose is essential as the body’s source of energy, and for the functioning of many organs and systems in the body, especially the brain.
The main symptom of this disorder is an abnormally low blood sugar level (hypoglycemia) during times of insufficient glucose intake. Hypoglycemia can present with drowsiness, confusion or loss of consciousness. Severe cases may exhibit loss of muscle tone (hypotonia); abnormal enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly) inability to gain appropriate weight and grow normally (failure to thrive), small head size and developmental delay. Poor appetite, vomiting, seizures and coma may also occur. If hypoglycemia is not treated, the disease can progress to multiorgan system damage or acute liver failure. Sometimes the presence of excess acid in the circulating blood (lactic acidemia) is noticed.
At birth, babies with PEPCK deficiency may present with hypoglycemia, and may have an enlarged liver, and apneas. Many babies do not show any symptoms, however. Typically, PEPCK deficiency presents in early childhood with symptoms noted during infections or after vigorous exercise, especially after a period of overnight fasting, when gluconeogenesis would normally be activated. These individuals tend to present with fasting hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) and may show shakiness, irritability or even lethargy. Liver impairment may occur and results in abnormal liver enzyme levels found in the blood. Abnormal amounts of other metabolites in the blood or urine can give a diagnostic clue (glutamine, or fumarate and other metabolites of tricarboxylic acid cycle). The symptoms of PEPCK deficiency vary among patients, and not all will exhibit every symptom. Many children develop normally despite episodes of hypoglycemia. The course of this disorder can be very rapid, however, if hypoglycemia is not treated.

