Pertussis

synonyms:
Whooping Cough

overview:
Pertussis is a highly contagious acute respiratory disease caused by the bacteria Bordetella pertussis. This disease has 3 stages: catarrhal, paroxysmal, and convalescent. The symptoms of the catarrhal stage are mild and may go unnoticed. The paroxysmal stage of Pertussis is characterized by episodes of coughing with a distinctive “whooping” sound when breathing in (inspiration). This characteristic cough gives the disease its common name, Whooping Cough. During the convalescent stage, episodes of coughing are less frequent and symptoms improve. The incidence of Pertussis has diminished greatly with widespread use of the DPT vaccine (Diphtheria Pertussis Tetanus), but in certain areas of the United States outbreaks have occurred periodically in recent years.

symptoms:
Pertussis is a highly contagious disease that typically lasts for approximately 6 to 10 weeks. The symptoms are more severe in infants or in individuals who have never been immunized against the disease. There are three recognized stages of the disease: catarrhal, paroxysmal, and convalescent.
The incubation period for Pertussis is 7 to 10 days. During the first or catarrhal stage of the disease, the symptoms are mild and may go unnoticed or be confused with the common cold or influenza. Symptoms may include a general feeling of ill health (malaise), a runny nose (rhinorrhea), sneezing, and/or tearing of the eyes (lacrimation). Some affected people may experience a slight elevation in temperature (low-grade fever). Toward the end of this phase, a cough develops that becomes increasingly more persistent, especially at night.
The paroxysmal stage of Pertussis is characterized by recurring intense episodes of coughing. An episode or “paroxysm” consists of a series of coughs in rapid succession with increasing intensity. The last cough in the series is followed by a large inspiration that produces a characteristic “whoop” sound. During these coughing episodes, affected individuals find it difficult to draw air into the lungs (inspiration) between coughs. Typically, people with Pertussis cough up (expectorate) large amounts of thick mucus, which may cause vomiting (post-pertussis emesis). Other symptoms during an attack may include bulging eyes, prominent veins in the neck, protrusion of the tongue, and/or excessive salivation. Aspiration of mucous into the lungs may cause bacterial pneumonia. Infections of the middle ear (otitis media) may also occur during this stage of the disease.
The convalescent stage of Pertussis begins approximately 4 weeks after onset of the disease. Episodes of coughing become less frequent and not as severe. Slow recovery begins during this phase of the disease. Occasionally episodes of coughing may recur for months.
The coughing associated with Pertussis may cause a sudden increase in the pressure within the blood vessels of the nose and/or eyes. This may lead to nosebleeds (epistaxis) and the appearance of red blood vessels in the white of the eyes (scleral hemorrhage). Other more severe complications may include seizures, a collapsed lung (atelectasis), abnormal enlargement and destruction of the bronchi and bronchial tubes (bronchiectasis), the escape of air from the lungs into the surrounding soft tissues (subcutaneous emphysema), and/or a hernia in the area of the groin (inguinal hernia). Bacterial superinfection and, in rare cases, acute inflammation of the brain (encephalitis) may also occur.

