Peutz Jeghers Syndrome

synonyms:
PJSpolyposis, hamartomatous intestinalpolyps and spots syndrome

overview:
Summary

Peutz Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is an autosomal dominant genetic condition affecting around 1/50,000 and 1/200,000 individuals. Symptoms usually appear during the first decade of life and begin with spots of dark skin freckling (melanocytic macules) around the mouth, eyes, nostrils, fingers as well as inside the mouth (oral mucosa) and around the anus (perianal). Multiple benign polyps called hamartomas also begin to grow in the gastrointestinal tract of affected individuals around that age. These polyps are located throughout the gastrointestinal tract and can cause nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, intestinal obstruction and rectal bleeding. Abdominal surgery or endoscopic procedures might be necessary to remove polyps (polypectomy) to prevent polyps-related complications, such as folding of the intestine into itself (intussusception). Affected individuals have an increased risk for intestinal and other cancers. Frequent medical examination and testing is necessary to allow early detection of polyps and cancer.

Introduction

Peutz Jeghers syndrome is part of a heterogeneous group of disorders, known as hamartomatous polyposis syndromes that involve the growth of multiple polyps in the gastrointestinal tract of affected individuals. It was first described in a pair of twin sisters with dark pigment spots on their lips and oral mucosa by Dr. J.T. Connor in 1895. These symptoms were attributed to a familial syndrome in 1921, when Dr. Jan Peutz described four affected siblings. The syndrome was then defined as a distinct entity by Dr. Harold Jeghers in 1949 when he described 10 cases and was subsequently named Peutz Jeghers syndrome in 1954 by Dr. Andre Bruwer. The gene causing PJS (STK-11/LKB1) was identified in 1998 and allows early detection of the disease and screening of family members.

symptoms:
PJS is characterized by the growth of multiple benign polyps called hamartomas on the mucous lining of the gastrointestinal system and spots of dark blue to dark brown skin freckling (melanocytic macules) around the mouth, eyes, nostrils, fingers, oral mucosa and anus (perianal). These melanocytic macules can appear as early as the first year of life and are present in most affected children under five years of age. They tend to fade away with age and might completely disappear in puberty or adulthood, although they tend to persist in the oral mucosa. Polyps also begin to grow within the first years of life, but associated symptoms typically arise between 10 to 30 years of age. Around half of patients with PJS have to undergo surgery by age 18 because of polyps-related complication. Polyps most often tend to develop in the small intestine (in the jejunum, specifically) but can also arise in the stomach and large intestine. Rarely, polyps can grow outside the gastrointestinal tract and affect the ureters, bladder, lungs, bronchi, and gallbladder. Gastrointestinal polyps can cause abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, intestinal obstruction and rectal bleeding, which can lead to anemia. They can also provoke folding of the intestine into itself (intussusception), which can lead to severe abdominal pain and emergency surgery.
Individuals with Peutz Jeghers syndrome are at a highly increased risk of developing gastrointestinal and other cancers including breast, cervical, uterine, pancreas, and lung.  The lifetime risk of developing cancer in affected individuals can be as high as 93%. Individuals that develop cancer are usually affected around their fifth decade of life (age 40-49). Affected females have an increased risk for a benign ovarian tumor called SCTAT (sex cord tumors with annular tumors) for which symptoms may include irregular or heavy periods or early puberty. Usually before age 20, affected males can develop a tumor in the testes, called Sertoli cells carcinoma that secretes estrogen and can lead to breast development (gynecomastia).

