Pfeiffer Syndrome

synonyms:
acrocephalosyndactyly, type VACSVcraniofacial-skeletal-dermatologic syndromeNoack syndrome

overview:
Pfeiffer syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by premature fusion of certain skull bones (craniosynostosis) and broad and medially deviated thumbs and great toes. Most affected individuals also have differences to their midface (protruding eyes) and conductive hearing loss. Three forms of Pfeiffer syndrome are recognized, of which types II and III are the more serious.
Pfeiffer syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition associated with changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in the genes fibroblast growth factor receptor-2 (FGFR2) and fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 (FGFR1).
Pfeiffer syndrome is now known to be a member of a group of conditions caused by variants in theFGFRgenes including Apert syndrome, Crouzon syndrome, Beare-Stevenson syndrome,FGFR2-related isolated coronal synostosis, Jackson-Weiss syndrome, Crouzon syndrome with acanthosis nigricans and Muenke syndrome. (For more information on these conditions, please see the Related Disorders section below.)

symptoms:
Infants with Pfeiffer syndrome type I have craniosynostosis that causes the head to appear short and tall (turribrachycephaly). Additional features may include a high, full forehead; underdeveloped midfacial regions (midface hypoplasia); widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); an underdeveloped upper jaw (hypoplastic maxilla), with a prominent lower jaw; and dental abnormalities. Intelligence is usually normal. There is usually some degree of hearing loss, which is more commonly conductive rather than sensorineural.
Pfeiffer syndrome type II is characterized by a more severe form of craniosynostosis (cloverleaf skull), with more severe hand and foot anomalies and additional malformations of the limbs. In infants with Pfeiffer syndrome type II, premature closure of the fibrous joints (cranial sutures) between several bones in the skull causes the skull to have a “tri-lobed” appearance (cloverleaf skull deformity, or Kleeblattschadel type craniosynostosis). In addition, this form of craniosynostosis is often associated with hydrocephalus, a condition in which the normal flow of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is altered, leading to abnormal widening (dilatation) of the spaces within the brain (ventricles) causing accumulation of CSF in the skull and increased pressure on the brain. Characteristic craniofacial features associated with Pfeiffer syndrome type II may include an abnormally high, broad forehead; severe protrusion of the eyes (ocular proptosis); an unusually flat middle portion of the face (midface hypoplasia); a “beak-shaped” nose; and downwardly displaced ears. Besides craniofacial features, some may have abnormalities in the structure of segments of the spinal column. Affected infants may also exhibit fixation and lack of mobility (ankylosis) of the elbow joints and/or, in some people, various malformations of certain internal organs in the abdomen (visceral anomalies). In addition, infants with Pfeiffer syndrome type II often experience impaired mental development and neurological problems due to severe involvement of the brain, and/or hypoxia due to problems with breathing. Without appropriate treatment, the physical abnormalities associated with the disorder may lead to life-threatening complications during infancy. Severe obstructive sleep apnea is common. Additionally, closure of the tracheal cartilage (tracheal cartilaginous sleeve) can worsen breathing problems.
Individuals with Pfeiffer syndrome type III have symptoms and findings similar to those present in Pfeiffer syndrome type II, with the exception of the cloverleaf skull deformity. Additional characteristics associated with Pfeiffer syndrome type III include a shortened base of the skull (anterior cranial base); the abnormal presence of certain teeth at birth (natal teeth); severe protrusion of the eyes (ocular proptosis) due to shallowness of the bony cavities that accommodate the eyeballs (orbit); and/or various malformations of certain internal organs in the abdominal area (visceral anomalies). As in type II, individuals with Pfeiffer syndrome type III often experience impaired mental development and severe neurological problems and may develop potentially life-threatening complications early in life without appropriate treatment.

