Phelan-McDermid Syndrome

synonyms:
22q13 deletion syndromering Chromosome 22SHANK3pathogenic variantPMS

overview:
Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMS) is a rare genetic condition caused by a deletion or other structural change of the terminal end of chromosome 22 in the 22q13 region or a disease-causing (pathogenic) variant of theSHANK3gene.
The genetic change that causes PMS can occur sporadically (de novo) or be inherited from a parent (20%) who carries a related genetic change. Because the genetic change varies in terms of the size of the deleted segment of chromosome 22 or the specific pathogenic variant ofSHANK3, the signs and symptoms of PMS are variable as well and can cause a wide range of medical, intellectual and behavioral challenges. Although the range and severity of symptoms may vary, PMS is generally characterized by neonatal hypotonia (low muscle tone in the newborn), intellectual disability of varying degrees, absent to severely delayed speech, moderate to profound developmental delay, and minor dysmorphic features. Other common characteristics are behavioral issues including autism spectrum disorder or autistic-like traits, decreased perception of pain, motor delays, sleep disorders and seizures. Individuals with PMS may also present with gastrointestinal, renal and cardiac problems. There is currently no cure or treatment specifically for PMS, but many of the symptoms are managed by therapies and/or medications and researchers are working diligently to improve the understanding and knowledge of PMS and to find drugs and therapies that can improve the lives of people affected by PMS.
Current research indicates that the inability of the single functioning copy of theSHANK3gene to produce sufficientSHANK3protein for normal functioning (haploinsufficiency) may be responsible for most of the neurologic symptoms (developmental and speech delay, hypotonia, seizures) associated with PMS.

symptoms:
Most infants with PMS exhibit normal growth before birth (intrauterine growth) with normal growth after birth (postnatally). The first physical sign associated with PMS is neonatal hypotonia (low muscle tone) which is often accompanied by feeding difficulties, weak cry and poor head control. Children also experience a significant delay in reaching early developmental milestones, such as rolling over, sitting, crawling and walking; this delay is likely associated with low muscle tone. These are often the first noticeable symptoms that prompt families to start their diagnostic journey.
As children grow, additional symptoms develop. People with PMS typically have moderate to severe developmental and intellectual impairment, absent or severely delayed speech and about 75% have been diagnosed with an autism spectrum disorder or autistic traits. “Autistic-like” behavior includes tactile defensiveness, anxiety in social situations, avoidance of eye contact and self-stimulatory behavior. Individuals also exhibit obsessive chewing of non-food items. Sleep disorders are commonly reported, as are difficulties with toilet training, and problems with swallowing and eating. About 40% of people develop seizures which can range from mild to severe.
Many parents report that their child does not seem to feel pain as most people do, but instead has a very low perception of pain. Low perception of pain in conjunction with communication issues can make it difficult for parents to know when their child has pain due to constipation, reflux and other medical conditions that require treatment, or physical injuries. People with PMS also seem to perspire less than others and are at risk of overheating. It is very important that caregivers monitor carefully for injuries and overheating. Precautions must be taken to shield the individual from direct sunlight, avoid dehydration, use sunblock or sunscreen and wear protective clothing.
The facial features associated with PMS include long head shape (dolichocephaly), large/prominent ears, full brow, deep-set eyes, long eyelashes, full or puffy eyelids, droopy eyelids (ptosis), flat midface, full or puffy cheeks, wide nasal bridge, bulbous nose and pointed chin. Other features include underdeveloped (dysplastic) toenails during infancy and early childhood and relatively large, fleshy hands.
Up to 40% of individuals with PMS have kidney abnormalities, including multi-cystic kidneys, one non-functioning (under-developed or dysplastic) kidney, collection of fluid in the kidney (hydronephrosis) and backward flow of urine into the ureter and eventually the kidney (vesicoureteral reflux). All individuals diagnosed with PMS should have a renal ultrasound performed to check for kidney defects since many of these defects can be asymptomatic but may pose serious health risks that require intervention.
Gastrointestinal issues have been reported in several individuals with PMS, including gastroesophageal reflux (30% of cases), cyclic vomiting (25%), liver dysfunction and/or steatosis, constipation and diarrhea. Management of patients with gastrointestinal issues such as vomiting or diarrhea should prioritize the prevention of dehydration.
Over 15% of individuals with PMS have arachnoid cysts (fluid-filled sacs on the surface of the brain) compared to about 1% of the general population. While small arachnoid cysts may remain without symptoms (asymptomatic), larger cysts may cause increased intracranial pressure resulting in irritability, incessant crying bouts, severe headaches, cyclic vomiting and seizures. Brain imaging with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT scan) are indicated if an arachnoid cyst is suspected based on symptoms of increased intracranial pressure.
Lymphedema (accumulation of fluid in the arms and legs) and cellulitis (inflammation of subcutaneous tissue due to infection) may develop during the teenage and early adult years. Lymphedema can be treated by elevation, exercise, compression bandages and sequential pneumatic compression to move the fluid from the affected limb.
Neuropsychiatric illnesses including bipolar disorder, anxiety, depression, catatonia, psychosis, temporary loss of skills or long-term regression of skillsets occur in a subset of individuals with PMS. The exact percentage of people with PMS that experience these issues is not yet known. These problems often arise at the onset of puberty or early adulthood. Medical treatment guidelines devised by PMS medical experts continue to be refined in this area.

