PheochromocytomaParaganglioma

synonyms:
adrenal paragangliomachromaffin cell tumoradrenal gland chromaffin paragangliomaadrenal gland paragangliomaintraadrenal paragangliomachromaffin paraganglioma of the adrenal glandadrenal gland pheochromocytomaglomus tumorsextra-adrenal paragangliomaextra-adrenal pheochromocytoma

overview:
Pheochromocytoma is a rare type of tumor that arises in adrenal glands, specifically from certain cells known as chromaffin cells in the center of the adrenal gland called the adrenal medulla. These cells secrete hormones epinephrine and norepinephrine, and the pheochromocytoma continuously overproduces them.  Pheochromocytomas originate in one of the two adrenal glands located above the kidneys in the back of the upper abdomen. Paragangliomas are similar tumors which form in the paraganglia (nerve bundles) throughout the body. Under the microscope, pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma are the same. They are named differently largely just based on the location. For all pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma, approximately 80-85% occur in the adrenal medulla. Approximately 15-20% occur outside of this area in the chest, heart, abdomen, pelvis, bladder, and/or neck or base of the skull. The paraganglioma from the head and neck, and sometimes other locations, are silent meaning they do not produce high epinephrine or norepinephrine. Symptoms associated with secreting pheochromocytomas/paragangliomas include high blood pressure (hypertension), headaches, excessive sweating and/or heart palpitations. In most patients, pheochromocytomas/paragangliomas occur randomly for unknown reasons (sporadically). In approximately 35% of cases, pheochromocytomas may be inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. Some inherited cases may occur as part of another disorder such as multiple endocrine neoplasia types 2a and 2b, von Hippel-Lindau syndrome, neurofibromatosis type 1 or hereditary paraganglioma-pheochromocytoma syndromes or as familial isolated pheochromocytoma. Most pheochromocytomas/paragangliomas can be treated via targeted surgery.

symptoms:
Some people with a pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma may not develop symptoms (asymptomatic). High blood pressure (hypertension) is the most common finding associated with pheochromocytomas. High blood pressure may be always present or may come and go. Affected individuals may experience chronic episodes of high blood pressure often resulting in headaches, irregular heartbeats (palpitations) and profuse sweating (diaphoresis). The frequency of these episodes varies anywhere from several times a day to a couple of times a month.
Symptoms associated with pheochromocytomas/paragangliomas occur because of the release of certain hormones known as catecholamines (e.g., norepinephrine and epinephrine). The release of excessive catecholamines results in high blood pressure and other characteristic symptoms of pheochromocytoma.
Additional symptoms that occur less frequently may include pain in the chest or abdomen, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, pale skin (pallor), weakness and weight loss. Attacks of anxiety or apprehension may also occur. Some individuals experience an extreme drop in blood pressure upon standing suddenly, sometimes resulting in dizziness (orthostatic hypotension). Some individuals with a pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma may have difficulties in the breakdown (metabolism) of carbohydrates and can develop diabetes.
If left untreated, pheochromocytomas/paragangliomas may progress to cause serious, life-threatening complications including heart muscle disease (cardiomyopathy), bleeding in the brain (cerebral hemorrhaging) or the accumulation of fluid in the lungs (pulmonary edema). Some individuals with pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma may be at risk of developing a stroke or heart attack (myocardial infarction).
Approximately 15% of pheochromocytomas/paragangliomas may be cancer-causing (metastatic, meaning spread to other locations in the body). Extra-adrenal paragangliomas are more likely to be metastatic than adrenal pheochromocytomas. Metastatic pheochromocytomas/paragangliomas can spread (metastasize) to various areas of the body including the lymph nodes, liver, lungs and bones.

