Pityriasis Rosea

overview:
Pityriasis rosea is a relatively mild skin disorder characterized by a salmon or pink colored, scaly rash. Pityriasis rosea most often affects children and young adults. In many individuals with pityriasis rosea, the characteristic rash develops after vague, nonspecific symptoms that resemble those associated with an upper respiratory infection. The rash is usually located on the back, chest and stomach and resolves on its own within one to three months. Certain treatments may reduce the duration of the rash. Researchers believe that pityriasis rosea is caused by an infectious pathogen, but they have been unable to isolate and identify such a pathogen.

symptoms:
In many cases, the characteristic rash associated with pityriasis rosea is preceded by vague, nonspecific symptoms similar to those seen with a viral upper respiratory infection. Such symptoms can include fever, headache, stuffy nose, sore throat and fatigue. Sometimes there is no history of preceding illness before the rash appears.
Initially, affected individuals develop a herald patch, which is a single scaly red patch, usually on the back, chest or stomach. When located on the back the herald patch may go undetected before appearance of the generalized rash. A herald patch is a slightly raised plaque that is usually between 2 to 4 inches large. Often the herald patch is misdiagnosed as ring worm (tinea corporis). Over the next few days or weeks, multiple smaller scaly, pink or red spots will develop. In individuals with darker skin, the rash may be gray, dark brown or black. Although the back, chest and stomach are most commonly affected, the rash may spread to affect the arms, legs and neck. Less often, other areas of the body may become involved. In rare cases, the rash may be isolated (localized) to one specific area of the body. In some people, the rash does not itch; in other people, the rash may be extremely itchy (pruritic).
The rash usually lasts one to three months in approximately 80 percent of cases. Pityriasis rosea eventually goes away on its own, even without treatment, and usually does not leave any scars or permanent marks. However, people with darker skin may have residual dark spots at sites of inflammation which can last for many months before resolution.

