Pityriasis Rubra Pilaris

synonyms:
Devergie diseaselichen ruber acuminatusPRPlichen acuminatuspityriasis rubra pilaire (Fr.)lichen ruber pilaris

overview:
Summary
Pityriasis rubra pilaris (PRP) is a rare skin disorder that causes inflammation of the skin, thickening of the nails and at times shedding of the hair. The name means scaling (pityriasis), redness (rubra), and involvement of the hair follicles (pilaris).4
Typically, PRP appears first as a small spot somewhere on the face and then spreads to the back and the rest of the body.5
It may impact different parts of the body in different ways for unpredictable periods of time.5 The inflammation may cover the entire body or just parts of the body such as the elbows, knees, palms, and soles.6 The disease may progress and leave distinct areas of uninvolved skin, the so-called “islands of sparing” or “skip areas”.7
The classic adult type, the most prevalent subcategory, had previously been reported to resolve within three years. The largest case series to date, however, demonstrated that courses are often much longer than this. The pediatric type tends to be a more protracted course.36
The peak onset years of PRP are in the first, sixth and seventh decades of life. While it most commonly affects adults, there is a significant proportion of pediatric patients affected. The disorder favors no gender.8
There are five types of PRP, which are classified based on age of onset and body areas affected. The sixth type of PRP, or HIV associated, has been more recently described but is still debated. PRP usually occurs at random, but some forms may be hereditary.9
While the exact prevalence and incidence are unknown, there are an estimated 800+ “active” patients in the U.S. and less than 1900 patients in Europe. PRP is an ultra-rare skin disorder. In fact, it is considered an orphan disease. The rarity of PRP notwithstanding, the signs and symptoms of PRP often mimic those of eczema (31.6 million patients) and psoriasis (8 million patients).10-11
PRP patients and their caregivers quickly learn that every case of PRP is unique.4 Unfortunately, there is no specific or consistently effective therapy for PRP. In fact, there are no treatments approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) or the European Medicines Agency (EMA) for use in PRP.12 Nevertheless, experts tend to use a multimodal approach including topical and systemic therapies to control the symptoms of the disorder. Topical therapies can reduce skin (cutaneous) inflammation and aid with itch (pruritus) and dryness/flaking (xerosis). Systemic therapy can reduce inflammation and is generally required in the majority of patients with large body surface areas of involvement.12
Introduction
When James Shooter was admitted to St. Bartholomew’s Hospital in London, England in 1828, he unwittingly became the world’s first recorded patient with what the medical community would eventually call pityriasis rubra pilaris. In 1828, however, Mr. Shooter’s skin disorder did not yet have a name. Seven years passed before Claudius Tarral, a French dermatologist, wrote about the case in Traite theorique et pratique des maladies de la peau (Treatise on Skin Diseases) in 1835. Tarral saw it as a variant of psoriasis.13-14
It would take another 21 years for Marie Guillaume Alphonse Devergie, a dermatologist and forensic doctor at St. Louis Hospital in Paris, to publish the most complete description of PRP. In fact, it is considered to be the “original description” of PRP by the medical community. Devergie’s article was published in the Gazette Hebdomadaire de Medecine et de Chirurgie in 1856.14
While Devergie saw the skin disorder as a combination of “follicular lesions and psoriasis palmaris, pityriasis capillitii and pityriasis rubra”, it would take yet another 21 years before another Frenchman and dermatologist by the name of Richaud to recognize PRP as a distinct entity. Richaud published his paper “Etude sur le pityriasis pilaris” in 1877.15
When Ernest Besnier presented nine cases in a 120-page article published in 1889 — 12 years after Richaud, 43 years after Devergie, and 54 years after Tarral, he forever fixed the name of the disease as pityriasis rubra pilaris. Besnier too, was a Frenchman and dermatologist. He was also the medical director of the St. Louis Hospital in Paris — the same hospital as Devergie.16 The name comes from three Latin words: pityriasis (scale-like), rubra (red) and pilaris (hair follicles).2
Like many rare disease, the PRP community laments the snail’s pace at which PRP research progresses. What should we expect — it took 61 years just to pick the name.
Recently, the Research Group from Thomas Jefferson University’s PRP Center of Excellence has compiled the world’s largest cohort of PRP patients. With each day, new understanding of the diagnosis and management of PRP are gained; yet much work remains to be accomplished.

symptoms:
The terms “sign” and “symptom” are not redundant. SIGN is an indication of a medical condition that can be objectively observed by others, including healthcare professionals. In contrast, a SYMPTOM is subjective, information that is shared by the PRP patient with the healthcare provider such as pain, itching, fatigue. The following is a list of signs and symptoms that define PRP.
Pre-onset SignsMild signs include dandruff and crusty scalp, as well as limited red patches or scaling of the skin, (e.g., a “dime-sized red spot” on the forehead). The duration varies from patient to patient. At some point the patient determines that intervention of a healthcare professional is warranted, (eg, a red spot has doubled in size in less than two weeks).
Progression of SignsDepending on the advancement of inflammation, a general practitioner or dermatologist will see signs including pink, red, or orange-red scaly patches on the skin. These patches are usually itchy. Initially, PRP patients may have the scaly patches only on some parts of the body. Patches most often occur on the elbows, knees, hands, feet, and ankles. Skin on the palms and soles may also become red or waxy and thickened with a classic orange hue (palmoplantar keratoderma). The scaly patches may eventually spread over the entire body.17 Islands of sparing can occur within the salmon-colored patches of inflammation.
Cracks (fissures) may develop within thickened skin which can be painful and make walking and using one’s hands difficult. Nails may become thickened, discolored, ridged, cluttered with debris under the free-edge and may even shed. Hair may shed considerably due to the disorder itself or some treatments used. Heat intolerance, protein loss and fluid imbalance can occur when the rash becomes widespread (erythroderma).4
Diagnosis is often delayed by the prolonged course of evolution of the disease and its ability to masquerade as other disorders, particularly eczema and psoriasis. Fortunately, many of the treatments for eczema, psoriasis and PRP are shared.5
Acute Stage Signs and SymptomsA dermatologist will be able to see the signs of a body engulfed by dry, red, and flaking skin, swollen feet and legs, and cracked and bleeding hands and feet. There may be serious issues related to impaired mobility, eyes and vision (caused by tightness and pulling of the eyelids), and dexterity. The PRP patient will see symptoms of PRP from a different perspective, e.g., pain of motion, unrelenting itch (pruritus), and heat intolerance. Pruritus, pain, and sleep disturbance are common with this disorder. The acute stage poses the greatest challenge to body, mind, and spirit and can last anywhere from less than a month or many months longer. This is the time in the PRP journey that PRP patients and caregivers should seek support from patient support groups. It is also a time to address issues of depression.5
Management StageAfter the acute stage, the journey of a PRP patient takes on a new focus — mitigating and managing symptoms. Potential irritants are waiting on the roadside, such as joint pain, clogged ears, and disability claims, to name a few. While 90% of the PRP patient population can look forward to full remission within one to five years, the timetable is not certain. Those diagnosed with atypical adult onset and atypical juvenile onset, the chronic versions of PRP, must develop long-term coping skills. For everyone, the daily routine associated with medications, moisturizing, and dealing with the challenges of body, mind and spirit of this skin disorder cannot be ignored.
Remission & Healing MilestonesThe medical community defines remission as the disappearance of signs and symptoms of disease, whether through the use of medication or naturally with time. Recovery is considered the restoration of health or function. The PRP community has adopted a more celebratory approach to disease recovery with recognition of healing milestones. The return of sweat, the first trip out of the house for groceries, and dark hardwood floors that don’t need hourly vacuuming are all cause to celebrate. These milestones are symptoms of healing that PRP patients and caregivers feel and signs that everyone else observes.

