PLA2G6-Associated Neurodegeneration

synonyms:
PLANneurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation 2A (NBIA2A)infantile neuroanonal dystrophy (INAD), formerlySeitelberger diseaseKarak syndrome

overview:
Summary
PLA2G6-associated neurodegeneration (PLAN) is an extremely rare, inherited degenerative disorder of the nervous system characterized by abnormalities of nerve endings within the brain, spinal cord and peripheral nerves. PLAN is inherited as an autosomal recessive genetic condition caused by changes (variants) in thePLA2G6gene.PLA2G6tells the body’s cells how to make the enzyme A2 phospholipase, an enzyme that breaks down certain fats known as lipids. Symptoms of PLAN may start as early as 3 months through 3 years. Based on an individual’s age of onset and symptoms, their disease may be classified as one of three types of PLAN: infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD), a juvenile onset form called atypical neuroaxonal dystrophy (aNAD) or an adult-onset type called PLA2G6-related dystonia-parkinsonism. However, there is a broad spectrum of symptoms with people falling between these three categories.
Introduction
PLAN is classified as a form of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA), a group of disorders marked by progressive abnormal involuntary movements, alterations in muscle tone, and eye disease. These disorders usually show evidence of iron accumulation on brain MRI.

symptoms:
INADINAD is characterized by abnormalities of nerve endings (axons) within the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system) and outside the central nervous system (peripheral nerves), resulting in loss of proper nerve function.
The symptoms of INAD usually start to appear between the ages of 3 months and 3 years of age. The common pattern in young children with INAD is slowing of their development, followed by loss of skills and progression of the disorder over time.
Common symptoms include regression or delay:-Loss of previously acquired milestones, such as the ability to sit, stand, or vocalize sounds and words-Delayed walking or gait disturbance-Loss of muscle control (ataxia)-Low muscle tone in the trunk more than the limbs (truncal hypotonia)-Later development of muscle tightness and weakness in both arms and legs (spastic tetraparesis)-Abnormal reflexes
Common eye features include:-Crossed eyes (strabismus) and rapid uncontrolled eye movements (nystagmus) seen early in disease-Deterioration of the nerve that connects the eye to the brain (optic atrophy) seen later in disease
Common symptoms of cranial nerve dysfunction:-Speech problems including poor articulation (dysarthria), poor use of voice (dysphonia) and poor understanding of words (dysphasia)-Difficulty swallowing and chewing (dysphagia) causing nutritional problems-Choking and nasal regurgitation
Later in the disease, seizures may develop and cognitive decline occurs with progression. Progression of INAD is usually rapid and many affected children never learn to walk or lose this ability shortly after learning it. During the last stages of disease, severe stiff muscles, progressive cognitive decline and vision loss have a large impact on daily life. Many children with INAD do not live beyond age 10, but some do survive into their teens and early twenties. Death usually occurs due to secondary problems, such as aspiration pneumonia or other infections.
aNADThe symptoms of aNAD are more variable than those of INAD with symptoms developing usually by 4 years of age. Delayed speech and autistic features may be the first evidence of disease with regression or slowed development of milestones.
Common muscle symptoms:-Involuntary muscle contractions (dystonia)-Poor articulation and speech (dysarthria)-Muscle tightness and weakness in both arms and legs-Reduced joint mobility due to muscle tightness-Overactive reflexes developing early disease-Absent reflexes developing late in disease
Common neuropsychiatric symptoms:-Poor attention span-Impulsivity-Hyperactivity-Emotional lability
aNAD shares common eye symptoms with INAD. Seizures are rare but may occur later in the disease. Individuals with aNAD are fairly stable during their early childhood but start declining between the ages of 7 and 12. aNAD patients are very rare so the average life span is not known. However, the life span is expected to be longer than that of classic INAD since initial symptoms develop at a later age.
PLA2G6-related dystonia-parkinsonismThere have been only a small number of PLA2G6-related dystonia-parkinsonism cases reported. The age of onset of symptoms varies from 4 to 37 years.
Common symptoms include:-Tremors-Decreased muscle movement (hypokinesia)-Stiffness-Loss of balance-Walking difficulties: shuffling, freezing or getting stuck while walking-Involuntary muscles contractions and spasms (dystonia)– Poor articulation and speech (dysarthria)-Cold/blue hands and feet, difficulty regulating core body temperature-Constipation
Common neuropsychiatric changes (often the first symptoms seen in young adults)-Depression-Personality changes-Aggression-Delusions-Paranoia
As PLA2G6-related dystonia-parkinsonism is very rare, the long-term progression and average life span are difficult to predict. Once symptoms begin, the progression typically moves rapidly.

