Plague

synonyms:
Black DeathLa Pestepestilential fever

overview:
Plague is an acute, severe infectious disease caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis. The bacterium is found in fleas and wild rodents such as rats, squirrels, chipmunks or prairie dogs. Plague is a zoonotic disease, which means it can be transmitted to humans through animals, most often through the bites of fleas or through direct contact with infected animal tissue. The disease is most common in parts of Africa, Asia and South America, but it also occurs in some areas of the western United States. Symptoms can include an abrupt onset of chills, fever, and enlarged, painful lymph nodes (buboes). Most cases of plague resolve with effective treatment, though treatment must be started immediately to avoid life-threatening complications. Although plague is extremely rare in the United States, interest in the infection has heightened in recent years because of its potential use as an agent of biological warfare.

symptoms:
The symptoms of plague vary greatly depending upon the specific form that develops. The main clinical forms of plague are bubonic, septicemic, and pneumonic.
Bubonic PlagueBubonic plague is the most common form of the disease. Symptoms usually develop 2-6 days after exposure to the bacterium and include the sudden onset of fever, chills, weakness, headaches, muscle pain and a general feeling of discomfort or ill health (malaise). An infected individual develops a bubo – a tender, inflamed swelling of a lymph node. Buboes are firm and often very painful. The lymph nodes of the groin, armpit (axilla) or neck are most often involved.
If untreated, the bacteria can spread from the affected lymph node to the bloodstream (septicemia) and the lungs (pneumonia) and cause toxicity, shock, and other life-threatening complications.
Septicemic PlagueThis form of plague is characterized by massive growth of bacteria in the blood. It can occur as bacteria in the lymph nodes (bubonic plague) spread to the bloodstream, or as a primary infection (no swollen lymph nodes). Affected individuals may develop prominent gastrointestinal symptoms such as diarrhea, nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain. Other general symptoms may include high fever, chills, exhaustion, headache and muscle pain (myalgia). Septicemic plague progresses rapidly and can quickly cause life-threatening complications if not diagnosed and treated promptly.
Pneumonic PlaguePneumonic plague is infection of the lungs by the Yersinia pestis bacterium. It can occur as a complication of bubonic or septicemic plague in which the bacteria spread to the lungs through the bloodstream, or as a primary infection in which the bacterium is inhaled directly into the lungs. If inhaled, disease develops rapidly, usually within 1-3 days Affected individuals can develop a wide variety of symptoms including fever, chills, a rapid heartbeat, difficulty breathing, cough, chest pain, severe headaches and the coughing up of bloody sputum (hemoptysis). If untreated within the first 24-36 hours, this form of plague can rapidly progress to multiple organ failure, adult respiratory distress syndrome and ultimately death.

