Pleuropulmonary Blastoma

synonyms:
cystic mesenchymal hamartomamesenchymal cystic hamartomapneumoblastomaPPBpulmonary rhabdomyosarcomarhabdomyosarcoma in lung cystCPAM/CCAM type 4

overview:
Summary
Pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB) is a rare childhood cancer occurring in the chest, specifically in the lungs or in the coverings of the lungs called “pleura”. Four subtypes of PPB exist: type Ir, type I, type II, and type III PPB. Type I, II, and III PPB are usually found in children under the age of approximately 7-8 years; PPB occurs rarely in older children or teenagers, and even more rarely in adults, but type Ir PPB may be found at any age.
Type I PPB takes the form of one or more cysts in the lungs (air-filled pockets) and may be found in very young children (from birth to about 3 years of age). Type III PPB is an entirely solid tumor. Type II PPB includes both cystic and solid parts. Types II and III PPB tend to be found more often after 1.5 years of age. Type Ir (the “r” stands for regressed/regressing) is a type of PPB that is similar to type I PPB in terms of how the cells appear under the microscope, but cancerous cells are not present.
Children with type I PPB have a better outlook (“prognosis”) than children with types II and III PPB. Most children with type I PPB are cured (89%) but type I PPB can sometimes recur (“come back”) as type II or III PPB. Treatment for type I consists of surgery and sometimes chemotherapy. Treatment for types II and III PPB consists of surgery and chemotherapy and possibly radiation therapy. At present, about 50-70% of children with types II and III PPB are cured.
Introduction
PPB is a childhood cancer in the group of cancers called soft tissue cancers, which are scientifically called sarcomas. PPB is, therefore, a soft tissue sarcoma. Physicians classify diseases this way to compare features and to compare treatments. PPB occurs in the lungs and is the most common lung cancer of childhood, but PPB has no connection to lung cancers in adults that are often related to tobacco use or asbestos exposure. Like many cancers, PPB can spread through the blood to other areas of the body. When a cancer spreads to another part of the body it is called a “metastasis” of the cancer. Types II and III PPB can metastasize. The most common location for a PPB metastasis is the brain. PPB may also spread to the remaining part of the lung, bones, liver and rarely to other organs. PPB can also spread by growing directly into tissues next to the lung like the diaphragm.

symptoms:
Two different sets of symptoms are found in children with PPB, based generally on the child’s age and the type of PPB:
Respiratory Distress
Respiratory distress or breathing difficulty (dyspnea) may be mild to severe. Large pockets of air in the chest may prevent normal breathing. The air may be in large pockets in the lung (cysts) that compress the normal lung. Air also sometimes escapes from cysts into the chest cavity (pneumothorax). A chest X-ray or computed tomography (CT) scan will discover these air pockets and further investigations will lead to surgery to remove them.
Pneumonia/General Illness
These symptoms tend to be found in children with types II and III PPB. These children may present with signs of pneumonia or another general illness including cough, fever, difficulty breathing, fatigue, loss of energy and decreased appetite. Chest or abdominal pain may also occur. Occasionally there is weight loss. A chest x-ray will show a problem that may look like pneumonia (lung infection). Because PPB is rare and other conditions of the lung are more common, PPB may not be initially suspected when a child has these symptoms. When further investigations are done, such as a chest CT scan, these tests may raise the possibility of a tumor in the chest/lung.

