PMM2-CDG

synonyms:
carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome, type IaCDG1ACDGS Type Iacongenital disorder of glycosylation type IaJaeken syndrome

overview:
Summary
PMM2-CDG, formerly known as congenital disorder of glycosylation type 1a, is a rare multisystem disorder that involves a normal, but complex, chemical process known as glycosylation. Glycosylation is the process by which sugar chains (glycans) are created, altered and chemically attached to certain proteins or fats (lipids). When these sugar molecules are attached to proteins, they form glycoproteins. Glycoproteins have varied important functions within the body and are essential for the normal growth and function of numerous tissues and organs. PMM2-CDG can affect virtually any part of the body, although most cases usually have an important neurological component. PMM2-CDG is associated with a broad and highly variable range of symptoms and can vary in severity from mild cases to severe, disabling or life-threatening cases. Most cases are apparent in infancy. PMM2-CDG is caused by mutations of the phosphomannomutase-2 (PMM2) gene and is inherited as an autosomal recessive condition.
Introduction
PMM2-CDG belongs to a group of disorders known as the congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG). CDG were first reported in the medical literature in 1980 by Dr. Jaak Jaeken, et al. More than 100 different forms of CDG have been reported in the ensuing years. PMM2-CDG is the most common form. Several different names have been used to describe these disorders including carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndromes. Recently, researchers have proposed a classification system that names each subtype by the official abbreviation of its defective gene followed by a dash and CDG. Congenital disorder of glycosylation type 1a is now known as PMM2-CDG. CDG are a rapidly growing disease family and information about these disorders is constantly changing.

symptoms:
In order to help characterize and clarify this disorder, researchers have divided PMM2-CDG into three stages. These stages are based upon the symptoms at different periods of life. They are: the infantile multisystem stage; the late-infantile and childhood ataxia-intellectual disability stage; and the adult stable disability stage.
The symptoms associated with PMM2-CDG are broad and highly variable. The specific symptoms present, severity and prognosis can vary greatly from one person to another depending upon several factors such as the specific organ system involved. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals will not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
INFANTILE MULTISYSTEM STAGEThis phase is primarily characterized by feeding problems, neuromuscular abnormalities, severe developmental delay, symptoms resulting from episodes of internal organ failure, and/or additional physical abnormalities (e.g., squinting facial appearance, inverted nipples, fat pads above the buttocks).
Some researchers break down the infantile multisystem stage into two distinct clinical presentations. One presentation is a non-fatal neurological form characterized by psychomotor retardation, underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the cerebellum, and crossed eyes. Later on, symptoms of abnormal nerve development may occur as could problems with eyesight. The second presentation is potentially fatal as it affects the neurological system and various internal organs. All organs except the lungs can become affected. Mortality is approximately 20% in the first 5 years.
Most infants with PMM2-CDG exhibit normal birth weight. However, they may be slightly smaller than normal. Newborns may also appear sluggish and have an abnormally weak sucking response. Throughout their first year of life, affected infants may demonstrate little interest in nursing or bottle-feeding, have repeated episodes of diarrhea, vomit frequently, and/or fail to gain weight or grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive). In many cases, growth is significantly impaired. Infants and children may have also an increased (sometimes pronounced) susceptibility to infection.
Newborns with PMM2-CDG may also exhibit many neuromuscular abnormalities. Their arms and legs (limbs) may appear abnormally thin and weak and may fail to extend normally. In addition, affected infants may exhibit severely diminished muscle tone (generalized hypotonia), so that they appear “floppy,” have little or no control of head movements, and/or exhibit decreased reflexes (hyporeflexia).
Most infants with PMM2-CDG also exhibit additional physical abnormalities. Some have a distinctive facial appearance (minor facial dysmorphism) characterized by an abnormally prominent jaw; a nose with an unusually high bridge; an unequal, inward deviation of both eyes (bilateral internal strabismus and esotropia); a squinting facial appearance; large ears; and/or other facial abnormalities. Additional characteristic physical abnormalities may include inverted nipples; abnormally thick, dimpled skin, particularly on the thighs and buttocks (“peau d’orange” meaning “skin of orange”); an abnormal fat distribution on the body including prominent pads of fat under the skin (subcutaneous) above the buttocks; fat deposits around the external genitals (e.g., penis and scrotum in males, labia majora in females); and/or abnormal streaks of fat on the lower limbs.
From the age of approximately four months, most affected infants begin to exhibit delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and muscular activity (psychomotor developmental delay). Throughout infancy and early childhood, affected children may be severely delayed in achieving certain developmental milestones (e.g., sitting with minimal support, grasping objects, etc.). Although hand coordination may improve during late infancy, skills requiring the coordination of large muscles (gross motor abilities), such as those necessary for crawling, may continue to be delayed.
In most cases, individuals with PMM2-CDG exhibit underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of certain portions of the brain (e.g., the cerebellum). Symptoms indicating such underdevelopment usually become apparent during infancy and may include poor sucking response, abnormal eye movements, lack of coordination, and/or low muscle tone. Hypoplasia of certain portions of the brain may also play a role in the other neuromuscular abnormalities and developmental delays apparent during infancy and childhood.
In many cases, newborns and infants with PMM2-CDG may also have episodes of organ system failure, potentially resulting in life-threatening complications. For example, malfunction of the liver (hepatic dysfunction) may occur. Hepatic abnormalities include increased levels of certain liver enzymes (e.g., aspartate aminotransferase [AST] and alanine aminotransferase [ALT]) and/or abnormal enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly), possibly in association with unusual enlargement of the spleen (splenomegaly). Affected infants may also have abnormal deposits of fat (hepatic steatosis) and/or unusual accumulations of scar tissue (fibrosis) within the liver.
Because the liver creates many glycoproteins that function in the blood, liver malfunction may lead to problems with blood clotting and, in some cases, heart problems. For example, in some affected infants, abnormally increased amounts of fluid may accumulate between the two layers (pericardial space) of the membranous bag (pericardium) that surrounds the heart (pericardial effusion). The pericardial space normally contains a few small drops of fluid to help lubricate the contractions of the heart. However, if excess fluid accumulates in the pericardial space, the tough outermost layer of the pericardium (fibrous pericardium) may not be able to stretch normally, causing abnormal pressure to build up around the heart (cardiac tamponade). As a result, the heart may not be able to pump blood efficiently to the lungs and the rest of the body (cardiac failure). In most cases, in individuals with PMM2-CDG, such pericardial effusions do not result in life-threatening complications and tend to resolve over time.
Some affected infants may experience episodes of severe gastrointestinal bleeding and/or abnormal accumulation of body fluids in the abdominal cavity (ascites). Symptoms associated with these findings may include shortness of breath, difficulty breathing, chest pain, bloating, and/or cramping. As mentioned above, it is believed that episodes of pericardial effusion, ascites, and/or gastrointestinal bleeding may be due in part to certain blood factor deficiencies exhibited by some infants with PMM2-CDG. Many affected infants periodically exhibit low levels of certain substances in the blood (e.g., factor XI) that help the blood clot (coagulation factors) as well as deficient levels of albumin, a protein that helps regulate the movement of fluid between the bloodstream and tissues.
Some infants with PMM2-CDG may also exhibit kidney (renal) abnormalities. Such abnormalities may include enlarged kidneys (nephromegaly) and/or the presence of numerous small cysts within the kidneys (renal microcysts). Nephrotic syndrome, a condition in which the body secretes too much protein, has also been reported. Nephrotic syndrome can cause swelling (edema) especially of the feet and increase the risk of additional health problems.
Some children with PMM2-CDG may have an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism). Disease of the heart muscle (cardiomyopathy) and congenital heart anomalies have also been reported. Osteopenia, a condition in characterized by decreased bone mineralization and bone loss, is common and persistent. Some newborns experience abnormal accumulation of fluid in various tissues of the body (hydrops fetalis).
LATE-INFANTILE AND CHILDHOOD ATAXIA-INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY PHASEIn PMM2-CDG, episodes of internal organ failure (e.g., hepatopathy, pericardial effusion, gastrointestinal bleeding, etc.) tend to decline during late infancy and early childhood. However, during this stage of development, several additional symptoms and characteristics may become apparent including varying degrees of intellectual disability, further physical signs of cerebellar hypoplasia, visual impairment, signs of impaired nerve impulse transmission to the legs (peripheral neuropathy), and/or additional abnormalities.
During this second phase of PMM2-CDG, most affected children exhibit intellectual disability, ranging from moderate to severe. The degree of intellectual disability tends to remain stable at this point unless secondary events, such as stroke-like episodes, cause regression in a child’s previous mental capabilities. Although most children have some form of intellectual disability, children have been reported with normal intellectual development or only extremely mild deficiencies.
Language and motor development can be affected and significantly delayed. Most affected children do not develop normal speech patterns. Intellectual disability, severe development delays, cerebellar ataxia, and/or other abnormalities contribute to communication limitations. In most cases, however, affected children may begin to develop their own communication methods through the use of signs, expressions, and gestures. Most children with this disorder tend to be outgoing and sociable.
Additional symptoms associated with underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of certain portions of the brain (e.g., the cerebellum) also become apparent during this stage of PMM2-CDG. The cerebellum is the part of the brain that plays a role in maintaining balance and posture as well as coordinating voluntary movement. Such symptoms may include progressive balance problems (disequilibrium) and further impairment of the ability to coordinate voluntary movements (cerebellar ataxia). Cerebellar ataxia and other symptoms due to such hypoplasia tend to stabilize during later childhood or early adolescence.
Individuals with PMM2-CDG continue to exhibit severe psychomotor developmental delays throughout childhood. For example, although some children may learn toilet habits, they tend to do so much later than expected. In addition, although some affected children may learn to feed themselves, most require regular assistance. Many affected children are unable to walk without assistance.
In approximately 50 percent of children with PMM2-CDG, infections and fevers may trigger stroke-like episodes characterized by sluggishness (lethargy) and unresponsiveness to the environment (stupor), sudden unconsciousness, seizures, temporary blindness, paralysis on one side of the body (hemiplegia), and/or coma. In most cases, recovery may occur from such episodes within a few hours or days. However, in other cases, such episodes may be characterized by tissue damage and loss (necrosis) in part of the brain due to a lack of blood supply (cerebral infarction). Cerebral infarction may sometimes result in permanent damage, causing regression in a child’s previous mental capabilities.
In addition, many infants and children with PMM2-CDG periodically exhibit low levels of certain substances in the blood that help the blood clot (coagulation factors, such as factor XI) or prevent abnormal blood clotting (coagulation inhibitors, such as antithrombin III, protein C, protein S, and heparin cofactor II). The stroke-like episodes and cerebral infarctions sometimes occurring in children with PMM2-CDG may be due in part to coagulation factor and coagulation inhibitor deficiencies. In addition, some affected children may be predisposed to the development of clots within blood vessels (thromboses).
Approximately half of affected children experience seizures during such stroke-like episodes. However, in some cases, affected children may also experience seizures outside of these episodes (epilepsy). Epilepsy is a condition characterized by recurrent episodes of uncontrolled electrical disturbances in the brain that may cause spasms, convulsions, and/or other symptoms. In some cases, seizures may develop as early as the second or third month. Seizures usually respond to anti-seizure medications.
During this stage of development, children with PMM2-CDG may also begin to exhibit abnormalities of the peripheral nervous system (i.e., the motor and sensory nerves outside the brain and spinal cord). Due to loss or deficiency of the fatty coverings (myelin) around these nerve fibers (demyelination), nerve impulses may not be appropriately conducted from the brain and spinal cord to the extremities (peripheral neuropathy). Myelin, a substance made up of fatty materials and protein, enables effective transmission of nerve impulses from the brain and spinal cord by serving as an electrical insulator. As a result, the muscles in the arms and, in particular, the legs may become progressively weak and thin (atrophied).
Infants and children with PMM2-CDG may also exhibit various abnormalities of the eyes during this stage. In addition to the bilateral inward deviation present during early infancy, affected children may also exhibit wandering eye movements and progressive degeneration of the colored (pigmented) layer of the nerve-rich membrane lining the eyes (progressive tapetoretinal degeneration, retinitis pigmentosa type). Progressive tapetoretinal degeneration may lead to poor night vision, restriction of visual fields, and/or difficulty with glare. Nearsightedness (myopia) and cataracts may also occur. The degree of visual impairment may vary from case to case, depending upon the combination and severity of various visual abnormalities present.
Additional symptoms that may develop during this stage include skeletal malformations and abnormally fixed joints that occur when thickening and shortening of tissue such as muscle fibers cause deformity and restrict the movement an affected area (joint contractures).
Adult Stable Disability StageMost individuals with PMM2-CDG enter a period of general stabilization and adaptation. According to the medical literature, at this phase of development, the coordination and balance difficulties (cerebellar ataxia) due to cerebellar hypoplasia generally have stabilized; stroke-like episodes typically have ceased; and convulsive episodes in those who exhibit epilepsy may begin to decrease. In addition, in most cases, episodes of internal organ failure have not occurred for some time, liver function has stabilized, and fat pads and other subcutaneous abnormalities (lipodystrophic accumulations) may have diminished or disappeared.
Intellectual disability stabilizes in this phase. But for many affected adolescents, abnormalities involving the peripheral nervous system (peripheral neuropathy) may worsen. Impaired transmission of nerve impulses from the brain and spinal cord to muscle tissue, particularly in the legs, causes further weakening and wasting away (atrophy) of the muscles. In addition, atrophy, weakness, and shortening of muscle fibers may cause certain joints, particularly in the legs and feet, to become fixed in a permanently flexed position (joint contractures). In addition, all individuals with PMM2-CDG exhibit various skeletal abnormalities that may become apparent during this stage. Some abnormalities include short stature with long limbs and a compressed body. Others are reduced bone mass, a barrel-shaped rib cage, and abnormal curvature of the spine (kyphosis). Many of the spinal malformations occurring in PMM2-CDG may contribute to mobility impairment.
Because many hormones are glycoproteins, both males and females with PMM2-CDG exhibit certain hormonal abnormalities. However, the range of such symptoms may be greater and more apparent in affected females.
Affected females may not develop secondary sexual development (such as the growth of pubic hair and hair under the arms [axillary hair], breast enlargement, and an increase in body fat around the hips and other areas); in addition, they do not menstruate (amenorrhea) and are infertile. In such cases, it appears that the ovaries, the pair of female sex glands (gonads) in which eggs develop, fail to respond appropriately to hormones (gonadotropins such as follicle-stimulating hormone [FSH]) that normally stimulate their function. As a result, many affected females may exhibit abnormally high levels of such gonadotropic hormone (elevated serum FSH).
Although males with PMM2-CDG experience puberty and develop secondary sexual characteristics (e.g., enlargement of the penis and testes; growth of pubic, facial, and other body hair), they tend to exhibit low levels of an important hormone that helps to stimulate sexual development (testosterone). Levels of gonadotrophin hormones (e.g., FSH), which stimulate cellular activity in the male sex glands (testes), may be normal or slightly elevated (elevated serum FSH).
At this stage of development, individuals with PMM2-CDG exhibit stable (nonprogressive) cerebellar ataxia and varying degrees of peripheral neuropathy. Some individuals may continue to exhibit epileptic episodes; however, such episodes tend to occur randomly and are generally mild.
Some adults with PMM2-CDG continue to have difficulty with verbalization and communication. Some are able to read and/or write simple sentences; however, they generally continue to communicate through their own basic telegraphic language. Although affected adolescents and adults require ongoing assistance with daily functions and mobility, many are able to complete special educational classes, and some are able to maintain employment with special supervision and support.
In recent years, more and more adults have been diagnosed with a mild form of PMM2-CDG. Some of these individuals have normal intellectual development. Therefore, the complete clinical spectrum of PMM2-CDG is still being defined.

