Pneumocystis Pneumonia

synonyms:
pneumocystis jirovecii pneumoniaPJPPCPPCP pneumoniapneumocystic carini pneumonia

overview:
Pneumocystis pneumonia is a type of infection of the lungs (pneumonia) in people with a weak immune system. It is caused by a yeast-like fungus calledPneumocystis jirovecii(PJP). People with a healthy immune system don’t usually get infected with PCP. It becomes a problem only for people with a weak immune system that allows the fungus to cause infection. The immune system can be weakened by cancer, HIV infection or AIDS, high dose corticosteroids, or from medicine taken after having a bone marrow or organ transplant
PJP is the most common opportunistic infection in people with HIV, and it may cause mild symptoms. In those who are not HIV-positive, PJP usually leads to more severe symptoms, such as severe respiratory failure, fever, and a dry cough.
Symptoms may include respiratory problems as nearly all people affected with PJP have low levels of oxygen in their blood (hypoxemia), which can occur at rest or during physical activity. This condition makes breathing difficult. Other symptoms may include fever and dry cough. However, because the immune system is compromised, these symptoms can be more severe.
Treatment includes antibiotics such as trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX).

symptoms:
Pneumocystis pneumonia is characterized by a gradual onset with shortness of breath and/or difficulty breathing.
Other symptoms may include:
Dry cough: Unlike typical pneumonia, where a productive cough (with mucus or sputum) is common, PJP usually involves a dry cough. This happens because the mucus is too thick to be coughed up easily.
Fevers and night sweats: These are common symptoms that may accompany PJP.
Weight loss: Some people with PJP may also experience unintentional weight loss.
While these symptoms primarily affect the lungs, in rare cases, the fungus that causes PJP can spread to other parts of the body, such as the liver, kidneys and spleen, as the disease progresses.

