Poland Syndrome

synonyms:
Poland AnomalyPoland SequencePoland SyndactylyUnilateral Defect of Pectoralis Muscle and Syndactyly of the Hand

overview:
Poland Syndrome is a rare condition that is evident at birth (congenital). Associated features may be extremely variable from case to case. However, it is classically characterized by absence (aplasia) of chest wall muscles on one side of the body (unilateral) and abnormally short, webbed fingers (symbrachydactyly) of the hand on the same side (ipsilateral).
In those with the condition, there is typically unilateral absence of the pectoralis minor and the sternal or breastbone portion of the pectoralis major. The pectoralis minor is a thin, triangular muscle of the upper chest wall; the pectoralis major is a large, fanlike muscle that covers most of the upper, front part of the chest.
Affected individuals may have variable associated features, such as underdevelopment or absence of one nipple (including the darkened area around the nipple [areola]) and/or patchy absence of hair under the arm (axilla). In females, there may be underdevelopment or absence (aplasia) of one breast and underlying (subcutaneous) tissues. In some cases, associated skeletal abnormalities may also be present, such as underdevelopment or absence of upper ribs; elevation of the shoulder blade (Sprengel deformity); and/or shortening of the arm, with underdevelopment of the forearm bones (i.e., ulna and radius).
Poland Syndrome affects males more commonly than females and most frequently involves the right side of the body. The exact cause of the condition is unknown.

symptoms:
Associated symptoms and findings are extremely variable, including in rare cases in which more than one family member has been affected. For example, in some reported cases, one sibling has had all major features of the condition, while the other sibling has had only absence of pectoral muscle or hand involvement.
However, as noted above, Poland Syndrome is most commonly characterized by absence of chest wall muscles on one side of the body (unilateral) as well as involvement of the hand on the same side (ipsilateral). In approximately 75 percent of cases, such abnormalities affect the right side of the body.
In most affected individuals, there is absence of the sternal portion of the pectoralis major as well as absence of the pectoralis minor. The pectoralis major, a large muscle of the upper chest wall, arises from the breastbone (sternum), the collarbone (clavicle), and cartilages of the second to the sixth ribs; it acts on the joint of the shoulder, functioning to move the arm across the body. The pectoralis minor is a thin, triangular muscle beneath the pectoralis major. This muscle arises from the third to fifth ribs and functions to rotate the shoulder blade (scapula) and move it forward and down.
In some individuals with Poland Syndrome, there may also be unilateral absence of other regional muscles, such as certain large muscles of the back (latissimus dorsi) and/or a thin muscle of the chest wall that extends from ribs under the arm to the scapula (serratus anterior).
In some cases, associated abnormalities may include underdevelopment or absence of the darkened area around the nipple (areola) and the nipple and/or abnormal patchy hair growth under the arm (axilla). In addition, in affected females, there may be underdevelopment or absence of the breast and subcutaneous tissues.
Additional, variable bone defects may also be present in some individuals with Poland Syndrome. These may include underdevelopment or absence of certain upper ribs and the bars of cartilage (costal cartilages) by which the ribs are attached to the sternum. In addition, in some cases, there may be abnormal elevation and/or underdevelopment of the shoulder blade (scapula), limited movement of the arm on the affected side, and the development of a lump at the base of the neck due to elevation of the scapula (a condition known as Sprengel deformity). (For more information, please choose “Sprengel” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)
As noted above, most individuals with Poland Syndrome also have involvement of the hand on the affected side of the body. Certain bones of the fingers (phalanges) are underdeveloped or absent, resulting in abnormally short fingers (brachydactyly). In addition, in most cases, there is webbing (syndactyly) of certain fingers, particularly the index and middle fingers. In addition, in some cases, affected individuals may have abnormal shortening of the arm, with underdevelopment of the bones on the thumb and pinky sides of the forearm (i.e., radius and ulna).

