Polymyositis and Necrotizing Myopathy

overview:
Summary
Polymyositis (PM) and necrotizing myopathy (NM) are two types of inflammatory myopathy characterized by characteristic features on a muscle biopsy. PM has more inflammatory changes in the muscle tissue, while NM has more necrosis and degeneration of the muscle fibers. Both lead to symmetric weakness and some degree of muscle wasting (atrophy). The muscles that are principally affected include those closest to and within the trunk of the body such as the hip, shoulders, arms, pharynx and neck. PM occurs most often in women over 20 years of age, but men can also be affected. NM can occur in all age groups and is very rarely seen as a complication of the statin drugs used to lower the serum cholesterol. Muscle weakness usually happens over days, weeks or months. Some affected people have muscle pain, breathing problems, and trouble swallowing.
Introduction
The inflammatory myopathies are a group of diseases that involve chronic muscle inflammation and weakness. They are thought to be autoimmune diseases, meaning the body’s natural defenses (antibodies, lymphocytes, etc.) against invading organisms begin to attack perfectly healthy tissue for unknown reasons, leading to inflammation or swelling. Over the past several years, PM has been less frequently diagnosed as more patients are being classified as having necrotizing myopathy (NM) or an overlap of myositis with another autoimmune disease. NM has similar clinical features compared to PM and is distinguished by the characteristic histopathological findings noted above. Further, NM patients often have characteristic autoantibodies in their blood that can be detected using specialized laboratory testing.

symptoms:
The symptoms of PM and NM may start gradually or suddenly and often wax and wane for no apparent reason.
The major symptom of the disorder is muscle weakness, most often in the hip and shoulder areas, eventually making it difficult for patients to lift their arms, get out of a chair or to climb steps. Other muscles which may be affected are the neck and throat muscles, which may result in difficulty swallowing and cause changes in the voice due to muscle weakness. Rarely, chest muscles are affected.
The muscle weakness may appear suddenly and progress over weeks to months. Additionally, the degree of muscle weakness may fluctuate over time as well. The muscles of the hands, feet and face are rarely involved in PM or NM, but generalized muscle pain may occur. Atrophy (loss of bulk) of muscle and contractures of the muscle around larger joints may develop late in the chronic stage.
Other symptoms of PM and NM may include weight loss and fatigue, and patients with PM or the overlap syndrome noted above may also have fever, joint pain and Raynaud phenomenon which is a sensitivity to the cold that is most often felt in the fingers. Raynaud phenomenon is caused by constriction (narrowing) of the blood vessels in the fingers upon exposure to the cold. Cracking of the fingers, termed “mechanic’s hands” may also develop in PM and overlap disorders and this skin problem is associated with certain autoantibodies which circulate in the blood of affected patients.
The joint pain seen in PM (called polyarthralgia) may be accompanied by swelling and mimic the findings seen in patients with rheumatoid arthritis but generally these rheumatic complaints are mild and respond well to glucocorticoids (i.e. prednisone). Gastrointestinal involvement in both PM and NM can lead to difficulty swallowing as the muscles involved in swallowing can become inflamed and weak, and the esophagus can be affected leading to heartburn but lower GI involvement is uncommon. Involvement of the heart, detected chiefly by irregularities in the electrocardiogram (ECG), has been reported but inflammation and weakening of the heart muscle (myocarditis) is rare.
Interstitial lung disease is a serious complication seen in PM and the overlap myositis disorders but is uncommon in NM and leads to cough with shortness of breath as inflammation occurs in the lung tissue. This may progress to scarring (fibrosis) of the lung tissue making the lungs stiff and inelastic. In some patients, lung disease may precede myositis and dominate the clinical picture.
Symptoms in both PM and NM may worsen during pregnancy in women whose disease is active increasing the risk of premature birth or stillbirth.
As noted above, PM can occur in overlap with other autoimmune or rheumatic diseases, including Sjogren syndrome or scleroderma (systemic sclerosis). In addition, malignancy may complicate the course and presentation of PM or NM but is more common in dermatomyositis. This is more common in males and females over the age of 50.
Abdominal symptoms, more common in children with juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM), may be associated with the passage of dark stools or the vomiting of blood from gastrointestinal ulcerations that may progress to perforation and require surgical intervention. Calcinosis (the deposition of calcium deposits in the skin and soft tissue or muscle) is also more frequent in JDM.

