Polymyalgia Rheumatica

synonyms:
Anarthritic SyndromeArthritic Rheumatoid DiseasePMR

overview:
Polymyalgia rheumatica is a rare inflammatory disease characterized by muscle pain (myalgia), stiffness, and additional generalized systemic symptoms such as fatigue, low-grade fever, and/or a general feeling of ill health (malaise). Polymyalgia rheumatica can be a relatively benign condition that is extremely responsive to treatment. In some rare cases, permanent muscle weakness, degeneration and loss (atrophy) of muscle mass, and disability may occur. The exact cause of polymyalgia rheumatica is unknown, although immunological factors and familial tendencies (genetic predisposition) have been mentioned in the medical literature.
Polymyalgia rheumatica is closely related to giant cell arteritis, another inflammatory disorder. Giant cell arteritis is characterized by progressive inflammation of many arteries of the body. These two disorders have been described in the medical literature as possible variants of the same disease process. Some researchers believe they represent different ends of a disease continuum. The exact nature of the association is not fully understood.

symptoms:
In most cases, the symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica begin abruptly (acutely). However, symptoms may develop slowly (insidiously) during a period of several weeks or months. Symptoms may include muscle pain (myalgia) and stiffness in the neck, shoulders, upper arms, lower back, hips, and/or thighs. The lower arms, hands, lower legs, and feet (distal extremities) are not usually affected by this disorder. Stiffness and pain, which typically occur on both sides of the body (bilateral), are most severe in the morning (morning stiffness) and after long periods of rest or inactivity (gel phenomenon). In most cases, the shoulder girdle is the first area affected. However, in other cases, the neck or hips may show the first signs of the disorder. Pain or discomfort usually begins on one side of the body before affecting the other side as well.
Additional symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica may include muscle tenderness and weakness, low-grade fever, loss of appetite, weight loss, fatigue, a general feeling of ill health (malaise), and/or depression.  In some cases, fever or weight loss may be the initial symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica.
About 30 percent of people with polymyalgia rheumatica develop symptoms that are characteristic of rheumatoid-like arthritis including joint swelling, pain (arthralgia), and degenerative changes in some joints. Low levels of circulating red blood cells (anemia, nonhemolytic type) may also develop in some people with this disorder.
The symptoms associated with polymyalgia rheumatica often disappear for periods of time (remission) and then reappear (exacerbation). These episodes may continue for about six months or up to six years. However, severe impairment or permanent disability, even after months or years, is rare. In most cases, individuals with polymyalgia rheumatica do not experience loss of muscle strength.

