Polycystic Liver Disease

synonyms:
isolated polycystic liver diseaseautosomal dominant polycystic liver disease (ADPLD)PCLDPLD

overview:
Summary
Polycystic liver disease, also called autosomal dominant polycystic liver disease (ADPLD) is an inherited disorder estimated to affect less than 1 in 10,000 people. It is characterized by the progressive growth of cysts of various sizes scattered throughout the liver. People affected by this condition tend to have more and larger cysts as they age and usually start to have symptoms as early as age 30. However, many affected individuals do not have symptoms. Enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly) can cause abdominal pain and discomfort, shortness of breath (dyspnea), early satiety and gastro-esophageal reflux. Rare complications are hepatic cyst hemorrhage, infection or rupture. Surgical and medical treatment is available to manage the symptoms, but the only definitive treatment for this condition is liver transplant. Most cases are inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, but some occur in families with no family history of the condition. Sometimes, cysts are found in the liver in association with ADPKD. In fact, most people who have ADPKD have liver cysts.

symptoms:
Polycystic liver disease is characterized by the growth of more than 10 cysts in the liver, ranging in size from a few millimeters to over 15 cm in diameter. Symptoms usually begin to show in the third decade, as cysts grow and increase in number with age. Some people begin to have symptoms in early adulthood, but many affected individuals do not have symptoms. The growth and accumulation of cysts can cause enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly) and compression of adjacent anatomical structures, leading to abdominal pain and discomfort, shortness of breath (dyspnea), indigestion (dyspepsia), gastro-esophageal reflux and limited mobility. More rarely, liver cysts can also compress the bile duct and lead to yellowing of the skin (jaundice). Compression of the blood vessels of the liver by cysts can lead to accumulation of fluid in the abdomen (ascites), bleeding and high blood pressure in the blood flow from intestines to the liver (portal hypertension). In rare cases, patients can suffer from cyst bleeding (hepatic cyst hemorrhage) or a cyst can be infected by bacteria (hepatic cyst infection), causing pain and fever. Infrequently, large liver cysts may rupture, causing severe abdominal pain. Even with the presence of many cysts, the liver of individuals with polycystic liver disease functions normally.

