Polycythemia Vera

synonyms:
erythremiaOsler-Vaquez diseasepolycythemia rubra veraprimary polycythemiasplenomegalic polycythemiaVaquez-Osler disease

overview:
Summary
Polycythemia vera is a rare, chronic disorder involving the overproduction of blood cells in the bone marrow (myeloproliferation). The overproduction of red blood cells is most dramatic, but the production of white blood cells and platelets are also elevated in most patients. Since red blood cells are overproduced in the marrow, this leads to abnormally high numbers of circulating red blood cells (red blood mass) within the blood. Consequently, the blood thickens and increases in volume, a condition called hyperviscosity. Thickened blood may not flow through smaller blood vessels properly. A variety of symptoms can occur in individuals with polycythemia vera including nonspecific symptoms such as headaches, fatigue, weakness, dizziness or itchy skin; an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly); a variety of gastrointestinal issues; and the risk of blood clot formation, which may prevent blood flow to vital organs. More than 90 percent of individuals with polycythemia vera have a variant (mutation) in theJAK2gene. The exact role these variants play in the development of polycythemia vera is not yet known.

Introduction
Polycythemia vera was first reported in the medical literature in 1892. The term “myeloproliferative disorder” (MPD) was first used to describe polycythemia vera and related disorders in 1951. In 2008, the World Health Organization reclassified MPDs to “myeloproliferative neoplasms” (MPNs) to reflect the consensus that these diseases are blood cancers (neoplasms). This group of disorders is characterized by the overproduction (proliferation) of one or more of the three main blood cell lines – red or white blood cells or platelets. Red blood cells carry oxygen to the body. White blood cells fight infection. Platelets are involved in clotting of the blood in response to injury. Three other disorders are commonly classified as MPNs: chronic myeloid leukemia, essential thrombocythemia and idiopathic myelofibrosis. Because MPNs are characterized by uncontrolled cell growth, they may also be classified as blood cancers.

symptoms:
The symptoms of polycythemia vera usually develop slowly over many years. Often, the disorder is found incidentally on a blood test as part of a routine exam before noticeable symptoms occur. Occasionally, affected individuals may report vague, nonspecific symptoms that eventually lead to diagnosis of the disorder.
Many individuals with polycythemia vera slowly development a variety of general, nonspecific symptoms that are common to many disorders such as headaches, fatigue, weakness, dizziness, excessive sweating especially at night and itchy skin that, in severe cases, may be worse after taking a shower or a warm bath. Additional symptoms may occur in some affected individuals including blurred vision, ringing in the ears (tinnitus) and abnormal redness of the skin especially on the face.
Eventually, the spleen becomes involved. The spleen is an organ located in the upper left part of the abdomen that filters out worn out blood cells. It often becomes abnormally enlarged in individuals with polycythemia vera as it attempts to clear a greater number of blood cells than normal – a condition called splenomegaly. Splenomegaly may cause an affected individual to have a bloated or full feeling in the abdomen.
Less common symptoms associated with polycythemia vera include a tendency to bruise easily, frequent nosebleeds or bleeding from the gums, enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly) and erythromelalgia, a condition characterized by a reddened or purplish appearance to the skin of the hands and feet. The skin may feel warm to the touch. Erythromelalgia can also cause a painful, burning sensation or swelling of the affected areas.
Some individuals with polycythemia vera may develop symptoms secondary to reduced blood flow (due to thickening of the blood) and abnormalities affecting the platelets, which can increase a person’s risk of developing blood clots. Complications that occur due to blood clots may be referred to as thrombotic events and, in rare cases, can be the first obvious sign of polycythemia vera. Specific symptoms depend upon where a blood clot forms. A blood clot can cause a stroke, chest pain (angina), a heart attack, deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or a pulmonary embolism. DVT occurs when a blood clot forms in the legs may cause the legs to become painful and swollen. A pulmonary embolism occurs when a clot forms in the lungs or when a piece of a DVT breaks off and travels through the bloodstream, eventually becoming stuck in the pulmonary artery. A pulmonary embolism can cause breathlessness, sudden pain in the chest, exhaustion or life-threatening complications such as high blood pressure of the pulmonary artery.
Some individuals with polycythemia vera have developed Budd-Chiari syndrome, a condition in which a blood clot forms in the main blood vessel leading to the liver (hepatic vein thrombosis). Symptoms of Budd-Chiari syndrome include pain in the upper right part of the abdomen, an abnormally enlarged liver (hepatomegaly), yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes (jaundice) and/or accumulation of fluid in the space (peritoneal cavity) between the two layers of the membrane that line the stomach (ascites).
The abnormal proliferation of red blood cells may also cause peptic ulcers, gout and kidney stones. Peptic ulcers are open sores on the lining of the gastrointestinal tract, which may cause bleeding (hemorrhaging) within the gastrointestinal tract. Gout is an inflammation of the joints caused by a build-up of uric acid. Abnormally high levels of uric acid can also cause kidney stones. Gout and kidney stone associated with polycythemia vera occur due to the high turnover of red blood cells, which results in higher-than-normal uric acid production.
Polycythemia vera may eventually “burn out” so that scar tissue replaces the marrow, and the disorder resembles idiopathic myelofibrosis. This may also be referred to as the “spent phase” of polycythemia vera. When this occurs, the marrow can no longer produce blood cells resulting in low levels of healthy, functioning red blood cells (anemia), platelets (thrombocytopenia) and white blood cells (leukopenia). In rare cases, polycythemia vera may eventually progress into a form of leukemia known as acute myeloid leukemia.

