POMC Deficiency

synonyms:
obesity due to pro-opiomelanocortin deficiencyPOMCobesity, adrenal insufficiency and red hair due to POMC deficiencyobesity, early-onset, with adrenal insufficiency and red hair (OBAIRH)proopiomelanocortin deficiency

overview:
Summary
POMC deficiency affects the way the body stores and uses energy. The main symptoms include constant hunger and excessive feeding, known as hyperphagia. Hyperphagia leads to obesity by one year of age and without treatment people with POMC deficiency remain obese throughout life. Other symptoms include low levels of a hormone called adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and adrenal insufficiency, which can be fatal if not treated early. Many individuals with POMC deficiency also have pale skin and hair. POMC deficiency is caused by changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in thePOMCgene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Diagnosis is based on a clinical examination, symptoms and the results of genetic testing. Treatment is available for people with POMC deficiency over the age of six using a drug called setmelanotide.
Introduction
POMC deficiency was first described in 1998. This condition is rare, making it difficult to predict exactly how it will affect someone with a new diagnosis of this condition. It is one of several conditions that include early-onset obesity, and these conditions can be difficult to distinguish from each other without a careful physical examination and genetic testing.

symptoms:
Most individuals diagnosed with POMC deficiency have early-onset obesity and adrenal insufficiency, a condition in which the adrenal glands don’t work correctly. The first symptom of POMC deficiency is often very low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) related to adrenal insufficiency and low levels of ACTH, an important hormone made by the pituitary. ACTH is necessary for the adequate production of cortisol in the adrenal gland. If left untreated, adrenal insufficiency may lead to liver failure and less commonly, death. Infants with POMC deficiency have a normal birth weight but are constantly hungry (hyperphagia) and gain weight very quickly. Obesity is common by age one. Children and adults with this condition have continuous hunger, obesity and behavior problems related to food and eating. Obesity may become severe, leading to other health problems. Some people have a low functioning thyroid gland and are shorter than average. Delayed or absent puberty has also been reported. Many people with POMC deficiency also have pale skin and light or red hair.

