Pompe Disease

synonyms:
glycogen storage disease type II (GSD II)acid maltase deficiency (AMD)acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) deficiency

overview:
Summary
Pompe disease is a rare disease continuum with variable rates of disease progression and different ages of onset. First symptoms can occur at any age from birth to late adulthood. Earlier onset compared to later onset is usually associated with faster progression and greater disease severity. At all ages, skeletal muscle weakness characterizes the disease, causing mobility problems and affecting the respiratory system.
The most severely affected infants usually present within the first 3 months after birth. They have characteristic heart (cardiac) problems (dysfunction due to heart enlargement) in addition to generalized skeletal muscle weakness and a life expectancy of less than 2 years, if untreated (classic infantile Pompe disease). Less severe forms of Pompe disease with onset during childhood, adolescence, or adulthood, rarely manifest cardiac problems, but gradually lead to walking disability and reduced respiratory function.
The scientific literature has different ways of subdividing the clinical spectrum of Pompe disease. Some articles describe ‘classic infantile’, ‘childhood’ and ‘adult’ Pompe disease while others discuss ‘infantile-onset’ (IOPD) and ‘late-onset’ (LOPD) disease.
Pompe disease is a rare, multisystemic, hereditary disease, which is caused by ‘pathogenic variations’ (abnormalities / mutations) in the ‘GAAgene’.
TheGAAgene contains the genetic information for the production and function of a protein called ‘acid alpha-glucosidase’ (GAA). Shortage of this protein hampers the degradation of a complex sugar named ‘glycogen’ into a simple sugar named ‘glucose’. Therefore, glycogen starts to accumulate in all kinds of tissues, but primarily in skeletal muscle, smooth muscle and cardiac muscle, where it causes damage to tissue structure and function.‘Enzyme replacement therapy’ (ERT), the only treatment presently available, aims to replenishing the shortage of GAA by intravenous administration of industrially made ‘rhGAA’ (recombinant human GAA).
Pompe disease is inherited in an autosomal recessive genetic pattern, which implies that healthy parents can have affected children.
Introduction
The human body can be seen as an assembly of interconnecting organs. Organs are composed of organ specific tissues, and tissues are composed of specialized cells like muscle cells, nerve cells, etc. Pompe disease belongs to a group of diseases known as the ‘lysosomal storage disorders’ (LSDs). Lysosomes are small compartments inside the cells wherein all kind of substances are re-cycled. The substances are degraded by the action of digestive enzymes. More than 50 different LSDs are presently known to be caused by the deficiency of one of these enzymes. Acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) is one such enzyme and is responsible for the lysosomal degradation of glycogen. A shortage or dysfunction of GAA causes glycogen to accumulate within the lysosomes, which subsequently leads to cellular malfunction, cellular damage, tissue damage, and ultimately organ dysfunction. In Pompe disease, the organ dysfunction is mainly manifested by muscle weakness and muscle wasting.
Pompe disease is not only listed as an LSD, but also as one of the 15 presently known ‘glycogen storage disorders’ (GSDs), a group of metabolic disorders characterized by abnormalities in glycogen synthesis and breakdown.
Pompe disease is known under the alternative names ‘glycogen storage disease type II’ (GSDII), acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) deficiency, and ‘acid maltase’ deficiency (acid maltase is another name for acid alpha-glucosidase).
Terminology
Pompe disease is divided into subtypes: ‘Classic infantile’ refers to the form of Pompe disease that was first described in 1932 and characterized by the onset of symptoms shortly after birth, generalized muscle weakness, and ‘cardiomegaly’ (a far too big heart), in combination with excessive glycogen stored in virtually all organs. Terms like ‘childhood’, ‘juvenile’, and ‘adult’ glycogenosis type II / Pompe disease / Acid maltase deficiency were historically introduced as names for the less severe forms of Pompe disease characterized by delayed onset and usually slower progression. Adult-onset was historically synonymous with ‘late-onset’.
After the introduction of enzyme replacement therapy, the meaning of ‘late-onset’ was increasingly referred to Pompe disease without hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) (thickened heart muscle).
Currently, the abbreviation IOPD (infantile-onset Pompe disease) refers in most but not all published cases to classic-infantile Pompe disease (some cases of childhood Pompe disease might be included). The abbreviation IPD (infantile Pompe disease) is also used. LOPD (late-onset Pompe disease) refers to all cases in which hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) did not manifest or was not diagnosed at or under the age of 1 year, as well as to all cases with symptom onset above the age of 1 year.

symptoms:
Patients with the ‘classic infantile’ form of Pompe disease are the most severely affected. Although hardly any symptoms may be apparent at birth, the disease usually presents within the first three months of life with rapidly progressive muscle weakness (‘floppy infants’), diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), respiratory deficiency, and a type of heart disease known as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, a condition characterized by abnormal thickening of the walls of the heart (mainly the left chamber and the wall between the left and right chamber) resulting in diminished cardiac function. These problems together culminate in cardio-respiratory failure within the first 2 years of life.
Many infants have a large, protruding, tongue and a moderate enlargement of the liver. The legs often rest in a frog position and feel firm on palpation (pseudo-hypertrophy).Feeding and swallowing problems as well as respiratory difficulties, which are often combined with respiratory tract infections, are common. Major developmental milestones such as rolling over, sitting up, and standing are delayed or not achieved. Mental development is usually normal. Virtually all infants experience hearing loss. The ‘classic infantile’ form of Pompe disease is caused by a total absence of acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) activity and by a rapid buildup of glycogen in skeletal muscle and heart.
‘Childhood’ Pompe disease typically presents during childhood, and ‘adult’ Pompe disease during adulthood. In the current literature, these two forms of Pompe disease are often grouped together as ‘late-onset’ Pompe disease (abbreviated as LOPD) despite the fact that the time of presentation can vary from the first year of life to the eighth decade. Patients who develop symptoms early in life tend to be more severely affected and to have a faster rate of disease progression than those who develop symptoms later in life. Both children as well as adults usually have more GAA activity (their GAA deficiency is not total) than the most severely affected infants (who do not have any GAA activity), and the glycogen buildup is usually not as rapid. However, symptoms do progress, and can greatly affect the quality of life and diminish the lifespan.
Childhood and adult Pompe disease are associated with progressive weakness of mainly the proximal muscles (limb girdle, upper arms and upper legs), and varying degrees of respiratory weakness due to dysfunction of the diaphragm and the intercostal muscles (muscles between the ribs). The lower limbs are more affected than the upper limbs. The extent of muscle involvement is highly variable. Balance can be affected as the major leg muscles lose their strength and spring, forcing core muscles to take up the slack to maintain an upright posture. The muscles adjacent to the spinal column (para-spinal muscles) and neck are usually also involved. Weakness of the para-spinal muscles around puberty can cause abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis). Due to the combination of these serious symptoms, affected individuals may become wheelchair and/or ventilator dependent.
Other symptoms can include chewing and swallowing difficulties and drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis). Additionally, blood vessel abnormalities due to smooth muscle weakness and problems of the urinary and digestive systems have been reported.

