Porphyrias

overview:
SummaryPorphyrias are a group of at least eight related disorders that primarily affect the skin or the nervous system, and sometimes the liver and other organs. Porphyrias occur when there is an abnormality in the pathway for making heme, a chemical that is an essential component of many enzymes and other molecules, many of which interact with oxygen. Heme is made in all tissues, but especially the bone marrow and liver. Heme is made in a series of eight steps, with a specific enzyme responsible for each step. Disruption of the pathway to make heme can cause intermediates between these steps to accumulate and cause symptoms of porphyria. Intermediates late in the pathway are porphyrins, whereas those early in the pathway are called porphyrin precursors. Accumulation of porphyrin precursors is associated with effects on the nervous system, whereas excess porphyrins are activated by light and cause skin photosensitivity. Each major type of porphyria is due to an abnormality of a different enzyme in the pathway that produces heme.
There are two general categories of porphyria. In hepatic porphyrias, pathway intermediates accumulate initially in the liver, whereas in erythropoietic porphyrias they first originate in the bone marrow, before being transported in blood throughout the body. Erythropoietic porphyrias often begin to cause symptoms early in life, whereas hepatic porphyrias are manifest especially in adults.
Three clinical types of porphyria are readily distinguished but are not completely distinct (see table below). The acute porphyrias, also known as the acute hepatic porphyrias, mainly affect the nervous system. Symptoms include periodic attacks of abdominal pain, other gastrointestinal symptoms, mental changes and pain and weakness of the extremities. Blistering cutaneous porphyrias are chronic, with skin blistering, scarring and pigment changes after exposure to sunlight. Non-blistering cutaneous porphyrias cause much more acute, severe and painful reactions after sunlight exposure, which greatly alters behavior but causes few chronic skin changes.
All but one of the porphyrias are related to pathogenic variants (mutations) in genes for enzymes in the pathway to make heme and are inherited in families. However, many individuals with a familial mutation may never have symptoms. Other external and genetic factors may be necessary before symptoms occur, especially in hepatic porphyrias. These may include certain medications, alcohol use, changes in diet or exposure to certain hormones or chemicals. External causative factors predominate in the most common porphyria, porphyria cutanea tarda, and most cases occur in the absence of a familial mutation.
Diagnosis of porphyrias can be challenging because they are uncommon with symptoms that resemble other more common conditions. Diagnosis is based on clinical suspicion and confirmed by laboratory testing. Further confirmation by genetic testing is now widely available and facilitates screening of relatives. After diagnosis, management focusses on treatment of presenting symptoms and prevention of recurrences and long-term complications.
IntroductionThis report provides a general overview of the types of porphyria. NORD has individual reports on each type.

symptoms:
ACUTE PORPHYRIAS
The acute (hepatic) porphyrias are characterized by episodes of abdominal pain (the most common symptom), constipation and other gastrointestinal symptoms, extremity pain and weakness and mental changes such as insomnia, anxiety, agitation, hallucinations, delusions and seizures. Examination often reveals rapid heart rate and hypertension. Attacks may last days or weeks. Other symptoms may include red or dark urine and urinary hesitancy. Weakness can progress to generalized paralysis and need for respiratory support. These severe symptoms can be life threatening especially if diagnosis and treatment are delayed. Effective treatments include intravenous infusion of heme and subcutaneous injection of givosiran, an interfering RNA therapeutic.
Acute Intermittent Porphyria (AIP)
Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is the most common of the acute porphyrias. Symptoms include periodic attacks, as described above. Long-term complications of AIP and other acute porphyrias may include progressive kidney damage, high blood pressure and liver cancer. Symptoms begin during adulthood in almost all patients and are more common in females. Photosensitivity occurs only in some individuals who develop advanced renal failure, which can elevate levels of porphyrins in plasma.
AIP patients have a mutation in the gene for porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD), also known as hydroxymethylbilane synthase (HMBS). Most individuals who inherit a mutation that can cause AIP never have symptoms. Others may have only one or a few attacks in their lifetime, whereas a minority may have attacks that recur frequently. Chronic symptoms may persist between attacks.
Variegate Porphyria (VP)
Variegate porphyria (VP) is the second most common acute porphyria. Attacks are identical to those seen in AIP. Blistering skin lesions are often misdiagnosed as porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT), which is much more common than VP. Symptoms develop after puberty, as in AIP. VP patients have a mutation in the gene for protoporphyrinogen oxidase (PPOX). Many individuals with aPPOXgene mutation that can cause VP never develop symptoms.
Hereditary Coproporphyria (HCP)
HCP is less common than VP. Symptoms are like those seen in VP, except that skin manifestations are much less common. HCP patients have a mutation in the gene for coproporphyrinogen oxidase (CPOX). Many individuals with a pathogenicCPOXmutation never develop symptoms.
ALAD-Deficiency Porphyria (ADP)
ALAD porphyria (ADP) is extremely rare with only eight well documented cases. Why all cases have been males is unexplained. Symptoms occur mostly in attacks, as in AIP. Symptoms usually begin at or near puberty but can begin in childhood. Chronic neurological symptoms are seen in severe cases. In one case, onset in an adult was associated with a bone marrow disorder (polycythemia vera).
BLISTERING CUTANEOUS PORPHYRIASPorphyria Cutanea Tarda (PCT)
This hepatic porphyria is the most common of all porphyrias, and also the most readily treated. It is primarily an acquired, iron related disease in which there is inhibition of uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase (UROD), the fifth enzyme in the heme synthetic pathway, in the liver. A minority or patients have a predisposingURODgene mutation and are classified as having familial PCT. Symptoms usually occur after age 40. Sun-exposed areas of the skin (most commonly the backs of the hands) can become friable and prone to blistering, scarring and excess hair growth. Other predisposing factors include chronic hepatitis C, HIV infection, alcohol, smoking, estrogens and excess iron. Some of these factors and PCT itself can lead to chronic liver disease and liver cancer. PCT responds well to treatment with phlebotomies (to reduce iron) or a low dose regimen of hydroxychloroquine. Treatment of hepatitis C, if present, is also highly effective.
Erythropoietic Protoporphyria (EPP) and X-Linked Protoporphyria (XLP)
The symptoms of the protoporphyrias (EEP and XLP) usually begin in infancy or early childhood. Sun exposure causes severe burning pain often within minutes of exposure. Patients learn to avoid sunlight and seldom develop blistering or scarring. Prolonged exposure to sunlight can lead to both cutaneous and systemic symptoms lasting for several days. Protoporphyrin is insoluble in water and is excreted in bile rather than urine. In less than 5% of patients, excess protoporphyrin can cause significant liver damage. Current treatment is sunlight avoidance and agents that increase skin melanin pigmentation.
Congenital Erythropoietic Porphyria (CEP)
Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP) is very rare, with onset usually in early childhood or even in utero. The blistering skin manifestations are usually severe, but mild cases can resemble PCT. Facial hair growth is often increased. Porphyrins are deposited in bone and teeth. Anemia in severe cases may require red blood cell transfusion. An enlarged spleen is common. Repeated blistering, infection and scarring can lead to loss of fingers and facial features. Rare onset during adulthood is often related to development of a clonal bone marrow disease.
Hepatoerythropoietic Porphyria (HEP)
Hepatoerythropoietic porphyria (HEP) is caused by two mutations in theURODgene and resembles CEP clinically. Unusually mild cases can resemble PCT. Symptoms usually begin in infancy or childhood.

