Posterior Urethral Valves

synonyms:
PUV

overview:
Summary
Posterior urethral valves (PUV) are a rare condition found only in boys where obstructing membranous tissue is present within the lumen of the posterior urethra. It is the most common cause of urinary tract obstruction in newborn males, occurring in 1 in 5,000 to 8,000 pregnancies or roughly 500 babies per year in the U.S. PUV is also the most common cause of chronic kidney disease (CKD) due to urinary tract obstruction in children. PUV can be suspected on prenatal imaging during the pregnancy, but it is only diagnosed after birth when imaging can be done on the child, including a bladder x-ray. PUV requires surgical treatment. There can be some residual bladder dysfunction that might require medical management.

Introduction
Posterior urethral valves are blockages in the lower urinary tract of males. They are folds of residual tissue in the tube that carries urine out of the body (the urethra) and only occur in boys. These valves were first described by doctors in the 1800s. They can also cause problems in the upper urinary system as well as other parts of the body such as the lungs. It is important to realize that there can be ongoing changes to the urinary bladder even after the PUV have been surgically treated. It is important to diagnose and treat the condition as soon as possible to prevent long-term complications, such as kidney damage, urinary tract infections and poor growth and development.

symptoms:
Most cases of posterior urethral valves are found before birth during an ultrasound. Doctors look for things like swelling in the tubes that carry urine from the kidneys to the bladder (the ureters) and for a swollen thick-walled bladder that may not empty well. A low level of fluid around the baby or swelling in the baby’s belly may also be seen.
After birth, symptoms of PUV can vary. Affected boys may have trouble urinating or need to urinate often, get infections or have a swollen bladder. They may also be very tired, not want to eat or not grow well. In severe cases, they may have trouble breathing because their lungs didn’t develop properly. Older boys may present with slightly different symptoms such as urinary tract infections, bedwetting after being potty trained or other problems like high levels of waste in their blood.
Doctors can look for signs of PUV in babies by checking their belly for any swelling of the kidneys and/or the bladder.
The most common symptoms in a child with PUV include:
● Difficulty urinating (i.e., weak urine stream or dribbling of urine) or inability to urinate● Frequent urinary tract infections● Abdominal or lower back pain● Blood in the urine● Enlarged bladder or kidneys● Swelling in the abdomen or genital area● Frequent urination● Poor weight gain or failure to thrive in infants and young children● Urinary incontinence or leakage of urine● Delayed development of physical and cognitive abilities in infants and children.

