Post-Transplant Lymphoproliferative Disease

synonyms:
PTLD

overview:
Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease (PTLD) is a rare, but well-known complication of solid organ transplants and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. PTLD is related to the Epstein-Barr virus and immunosuppression therapy. People who receive these transplants are treated with drugs that suppress the activity of the immune system. Doctors must suppress the immune system to help the body accept the transplant and avoid rejection. Individuals receive these drugs at the time of the transplant (induction therapy) and must remain on these drugs for the rest of their lives (maintenance therapy). Immunosuppressive therapy leaves patients at a greater risk of developing infections and, in some people, of developing post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease. Early diagnosis and prompt treatment of these disorders are extremely important.
PTLD is characterized by the overproduction and spread of too many white blood cells (lymphocytes). This can cause complications ranging from a benign (noncancerous) enlargement of an organ or tissue because of the overproduction of these cells (hyperplasia) to the development of a malignant (cancerous) form of lymphoma. In most instances, PTLD is associated with the Epstein-Barr virus, a common virus that does not usually cause problems in people with normal-functioning immune systems. The abnormal white blood cells that grow out of control, usually a type of lymphocyte called a B-cell, may be infected by the Epstein-Barr virus. After a transplant, the dormant Epstein-Barr virus is reactivated, or the transplant recipient becomes infected with the virus for the first time.
PTLD is classified as a lymphoma, a group of related cancers that affect the lymphatic system. The lymphatic system functions as part of the immune system and helps to protect the body against infection and disease. It consists of a network of tubular channels (lymph vessels) that drain a thin watery fluid known as lymph from different areas of the body into the bloodstream. Lymph accumulates in the tiny spaces between tissue cells and contains proteins, fats, and certain white blood cells known as lymphocytes. As lymph moves through the lymphatic system, it is filtered by a network of small structures known as lymph nodes that help to remove microorganisms (e.g., viruses, bacteria, etc.) and other foreign bodies. Groups of lymph nodes are located throughout the body, including, but not limited to, the neck, under the arms (axillae), at the elbows, and in the chest, abdomen, and groin. Lymphocytes are stored within lymph nodes and may also be found in other lymphatic tissues. In addition to the lymph nodes, the lymphatic system includes the spleen, which filters worn-out red blood cells and produces lymphocytes, and bone marrow, which is the spongy tissue inside the cavities of bones that manufactures blood cells. Lymphatic tissue or circulating lymphocytes may also be located in other regions of the body.
There are two main types of lymphocytes: B-lymphocytes (B-cells), which may produce specific antibodies to “neutralize” certain invading microorganisms, and T-lymphocytes (T-cells), which may directly destroy microorganisms or assist in the activities of other lymphocytes. Some T-cells are cytotoxic lymphocytes and they function by eliminating other cells that are damaged, stressed, or infected. In most people with PTLD, there are too many B-cells being produced, but T-cell PTLD is also possible.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms and severity of PTLD can vary greatly from one person to another. Some affected individuals develop a mild, noncancerous overgrowth of affected tissue, while other people can develop a cancerous, life-threatening form of lymphoma. The mild, benign form of PTLD can resemble reactive hyperplasia, the normal process in which lymph nodes become enlarged in response to an infection or inflammation. PTLD can be localized, which means the disease only affects a specific area of the body, or widespread (disseminated), which means it affects several different areas of the body. They can also cause severe, life-threatening complications. In addition, PTLD may affect the transplanted organ, and these disorders commonly involve extranodal tissue.
It is important to remember that every person is an individual and how these disorders will affect one person as compared to another person can be very different. This report is a general overview of these disorders and details the most common ways PTLD affects people.
The 2017 World Health Organization (WHO) classification breaks down PTLD into six subclasses. Three forms are classified as non-destructive PTLD and are called plasmacytic hyperplasia, infectious mononucleosis-like PTLD, and florid follicular hyperplasia. Three other forms are classified as destructive PTLD and are called polymorphic PTLD, monomorphic PTLD, and classic Hodgkin lymphoma-like PTLD. The three non-destructive forms are almost much more commonly associated with Epstein-Barr virus infection. The symptoms are usually on the milder end of the spectrum, which is sometimes called “early” disease. Early lesions can act similar to how the body reacts to an infection such as infectious mononucleosis, in which there is an increase in B-cell production, but no signs of tumor formation or cancerous cells. This is called reactive hyperplasia and is a noncancerous (benign) condition. In individuals who are taking immunosuppressive drugs, these lesions may go away when the drugs are stopped or reduced. Early lesions can potentially progress to more serious complications, but that does not necessarily occur. Polymorphic PTLD is characterized by the overproduction of both B-cells and T-cells and can have some features of cancer (malignancy), but fail to meet the criteria for lymphoma. The clinical symptoms associated with the polymorphic form are variable. Many cases of polymorphic cases are Epstein-Barr virus positive. Monomorphic PTLD is the most common form and is characterized by the development of malignant lymphoma, usually diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (this is the most common type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma in the United States). The signs and symptoms of the monomorphic form can range from early lesions described above to more severe “late” disease such as organ failure. About 50% of cases are Epstein-Barr virus positive. Classic Hodgkin-like PTLD is when PTLD fulfills the criteria for Hodgkin lymphoma, a form of cancer that arises from white blood cells, and are often are Epstein-Barr virus positive.
Specific signs and symptoms depend on several factors including the areas of the body affected and the type of PTLD. Affected individuals often develop symptoms that are vague and can be nonspecific, which means that the symptoms are common to many different disorders or conditions. When dealing with lymphoma, these symptoms may come and go and are sometimes referred to as ‘B symptoms.’ These symptoms can include a persistent, chronic fever; unintended weight loss, and excessive sweating, especially at night (night sweats). Some individuals develop abnormal enlargement of the lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy), fatigue, or a general feeling of poor health (malaise).
PTLD can often have a rapid and severe development (fulminant course). Disease may be widespread throughout the body and frequently there is involvement of organs and tissue beyond the lymph nodes (extranodal involvement). The exact organs involved can vary, but often include the gastrointestinal tract, the transplanted organ (allograft), and the central nervous system. Specific signs and symptoms will depend on the organ system(s) involved. For example, central nervous system involvement can be associated with seizures and neuropsychiatric symptoms. Headaches, nausea, vomiting, and vision problems can occur because of an increase in pressure within the skull (intracranial pressure).
PTLD may also be referred to as early onset or late onset. Early onset means that a lymphoproliferative disorder develops shortly after the transplant, usually within twelve months. Late onset means that a lymphoproliferative disorder develops after twelve months. In about half the patients, PTLD occurs within the first year following the transplant. Early onset PTLD is more likely to be characterized by the presence of Epstein-Barr virus in affected B-cells, and may include involvement of the donated organ or extranodal sites. Late onset PTLD is more likely to have disease spread outside of the lymphatic system (extranodal), and often results in the development of malignant lymphoma.

