Post Polio Syndrome

synonyms:
Polio, Late EffectsPost-Polio Muscular AtrophyPostpoliomyelitis syndromePost-Polio Sequelae

overview:
Post-polio syndrome (PPS) is a syndrome that affects some people who have had polio (poliomyelitis) and occurs many years (typically from 10 to 40 years) after recovery from the initial infection. It is characterized by the development of progressive weakness in muscles that were affected by the original polio infection. In addition, those affected may experience extreme fatigue and joint pain. Skeletal deformities, such as scoliosis, may occur as a result of this syndrome. There is variation in the severity of symptoms. In severe cases, symptoms may mimic those of the rare disorder known as Lou Gehrig’s disease (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis). The degree of muscle atrophy during the post-polio period appears to reflect the severity of the impact of the initial polio infection. People who were significantly affected by polio are more likely to experience severe symptoms from post-polio syndrome. The cause of this syndrome is not known. Although exact numbers are not available, it has been estimated that there are 300,000 polio survivors in the United States and that from one-fourth to one-half of them may ultimately develop some degree of post-polio syndrome.

symptoms:
Post-polio syndrome occurs at least 10 years after a person has been stricken by polio.  It is characterized by gradual deterioration of muscle function and increased weakness that usually occurs in the limbs that were most severely affected by polio.  Sometimes, the disorder involves muscles that appeared to be fully recovered or that were not involved in the original polio attack, including muscles necessary for respiration.  Other symptoms may include fatigue, muscle pain and twitching (fasciculations).
The fatigue associated with PPS comes on unexpectedly, sometimes as a feeling of total exhaustion throughout the body.  Pain in the muscles and joints is not uncommon.  Also, the affected person may experience problems related to swallowing, breathing, and sleeping.  People with PPS are less able to tolerate the cold, and they are less able to carry on with day-to-day activities such bathing, dressing, and walking.

