Posterior Uveitis

synonyms:
choroiditis

overview:
Uveitis is a general term that refers to inflammation of the part of the eye known as the uvea. The uvea is a relatively thick, strong layer of fibrous tissue that encloses and protects the eyeball. It contains many blood vessels and can cause inflammation in neighboring structures of the eye such as the retina, vitreous, optic nerve head and retinal vessels. The uvea consists of three parts: the iris, ciliary body and choroid.
There are four types of uveitis, classified according to the part of the uvea that is affected. Anterior uveitis, which affects the front part of the eye, is also sometimes called iritis since the iris is part of the front of the eye. Almost 80% of cases of uveitis affect the anterior portion of the eye. Intermediate uveitis, also known as pars planitis or cyclitis, refers to inflammation of tissues in the area just behind the iris and lens of the eye. Posterior uveitis, also known as choroiditis, refers to inflammation of the choroid, the back part of the uvea. Posterior uveitis may affect the retina and/or the optic nerve and may lead to permanent loss of vision. Panuveitis refers to inflammation throughout the eye and does not refer to a specific area.
Posterior uveitis is the rare form of the disorder and is the type of uveitis most associated with loss of vision. Uveitis can affect one or both eyes and it affects people of all ages, including children. Posterior uveitis can cause further complications if it is not treated, such as blindness.
People with certain genes may be more likely to develop posterior uveitis. Patients who have a weakened or impaired immune system (immunocompromised) such as those with HIV or AIDS are at higher risk for viral posterior uveitis. People with a normally functioning immune system may also develop viral posterior uveitis. Cigarette smoking has been associated with a harder to manage disease.

symptoms:
Some people do not experience symptoms; however, some who experience them may have a sudden onset and get worse quickly.
Symptoms that people may experience if they have posterior uveitis include:
FloatersReduced visual acuity (sharpness of vision)Light sensitivityBlurred or lost visionDifficulty seeing in the darkDifficulty seeing color
Floaters are small specks, flakes or clouds that move through the field of vision and decrease vision. While anterior uveitis often causes eye pain and redness, light sensitivity and blurred vision, the symptoms of posterior uveitis are more subtle. Uveitis can lead to other complications including glaucoma, cataracts or retinal detachment. Of note, 50% of patients have reduced vision and 10-15% have complete vision loss. Early detection and treatment is important to reduce the risk of permanent vision loss.

