Potter Syndrome

synonyms:
oligohydramnios sequencePotter sequence

overview:
Summary

Potter syndrome is a rare condition characterized by the physical characteristics of a fetus that develop when there is too little amniotic fluid in the uterus (in utero) during pregnancy. Insufficient amounts of amniotic fluid during pregnancy is called oligohydramnios; the absence of amniotic fluid is called anhydramnios. Amniotic fluid supports, cushions, and protects a developing fetus. When there is too little amniotic fluid normal pressure that is exerted on the fetus during pregnancy can cause certain physical features such as distinctive facial features or skeletal abnormalities. When oligo-anhydramnios is present from early in pregnancy, the lungs are also underdeveloped (pulmonary hypoplasia), which can lead to severe breathing difficulties. Most often, this condition is caused by absence of both kidneys (bilateral renal agenesis). This is sometimes referred to as classic Potter syndrome. Potter syndrome can also result from other conditions including polycystic kidney disease, malformed (dysplastic) or underdeveloped (hypoplastic) kidneys, and obstructive uropathy, in which urine cannot be voided from the bladder and builds up within the kidneys. Sometimes, later during gestation, there may be amniotic fluid leakage; this will not lead to Potter syndrome. Potter syndrome is an extremely serious condition and is often fatal at or shortly after birth, mainly due to the pulmonary hypoplasia.

Introduction

Some physicians believe that Potter sequence is a more appropriate name than Potter syndrome because while the signs and symptoms can vary among affected newborns, the sequence of events that leads to the development of this condition is the same. Some physicians use Potter sequence to denote a less severe form of Potter syndrome, but, generally, the three terms – Potter syndrome, Potter sequence, and oligohydramnios sequence – are used interchangeably in the medical literature. The condition was first described in the medical literature in 1946 by Edith Potter, a pathologist working in Chicago, Illinois.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of Potter syndrome can vary from one newborn to another. However, the condition is associated with severe complications affecting the developing fetus and is often fatal at or shortly after birth. When caused by bilateral agenesis of the kidneys, Potter syndrome is not compatible with life. Potter syndrome due to other causes is also often fatal at or shortly after birth, but there is an increased chance for survival. Infants who do survive the newborn period generally experience chronic lung disease and chronic kidney failure.
Because of the lack of amniotic fluid to protect the developing fetus, normal pressure from the uterine walls can affect the growth and development of the fetus. Such pressure may cause distinctive facial features including a recessed chin; a flattened, depressed bridge of the nose; eyes that are spaced further apart than normal (hypertelorism); low-set ears that lack cartilage (Potter ears); abnormally prominent skins folds in the inner corners of the eyes (prominent epicanthal folds); and a crease beneath the lower lips. This collection of facial features is sometimes referred to as “Potter facies.”
There is usually a lack of urine creation and output because of kidney abnormalities. Absence (agenesis) of both kidneys is the most common defect associated with Potter syndrome. The kidneys can also be malformed (dysplastic), or damaged because of a larger syndrome affecting the kidneys such as polycystic kidney disease, a group of rare disorders characterized by the development of numerous cysts within the kidneys.
The lungs may be underdeveloped (hypoplastic) and most newborns experience severe breathing complications after birth (respiratory distress).
Sometimes there are abnormalities in the development of the arms and legs, lack of formation of half of the spine (hemivertebrae), absence of the lower portion of the spine (sacral agenesis), congenital heart defects, or abnormalities of the eyes such as cataracts, or displacement or dislocation (prolapse) of the lenses of the eyes.
Infants with Potter syndrome are often born prematurely and are small for their gestational age, which means they are smaller than would normally be expected for how far along the pregnancy is.

