Prader-Willi Syndrome

synonyms:
Prader-Labhart-Willi syndromePWSWilli-Prader syndrome

overview:
Summary
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a genetic multisystem disorder characterized during infancy by lethargy, diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), a weak suck and feeding difficulties with poor weight gain and growth and other hormone deficiency. In childhood, features of this disorder include short stature, small genitals and an excessive appetite. Affected individuals do not feel satisfied after completing a meal (satiety). Without intervention, overeating can lead to onset of life-threatening obesity. The food compulsion requires constant supervision. Individuals with severe obesity may have an increased risk of cardiac insufficiency, sleep apnea, diabetes, respiratory problems and other serious conditions that can cause life-threatening complications. All individuals with PWS have some cognitive impairment that ranges from low normal intelligence with learning disabilities to mild to moderate intellectual disability. Behavioral problems are common and can include temper tantrums, obsessive/compulsive behavior and skin picking. Motor milestones and language development are often delayed. PWS occurs due to abnormalities affecting certain genes in the proximal long arm of chromosome 15 when deleted from the father’s chromosome 15 and hence referred to as a genomic imprinting disorder which depends on the sex of the parent donating the chromosome leading to the chromosome defect in the child. These abnormalities usually result from random (sporadic) errors in egg or sperm development but are sometimes inherited.

Introduction
Originally described in the medical literature in 1956, PWS is the first disorder confirmed to be due to imprinting errors (see Causes section). It is the most common genetic cause of life-threatening childhood obesity. The disorder was once known as hypogonadism, hypotonia, hypomentia, obesity (HHHO).

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of PWS can vary from one person to another. Many features of the disorder are nonspecific, and others may develop slowly over time or can be subtle. It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis. Often this requires input from a clinical geneticist or genetic counselor with experience in this genetic disorder to supply the most recent and accurate information about the disorder and discuss genetic testing options or treatment plans.
Initially, infants will exhibit diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), which can cause a baby to feel “floppy” when held. Infantile hypotonia, which is often severe, is a near universal feature of the disorder. Hypotonia can be present before birth (prenatally) potentially causing decreased fetal movements and abnormal positioning of the fetus (e.g., breech position). Prenatal hypotonia is associated with an increased risk of requiring an assisted delivery. After birth, hypotonia is associated with lethargy, a weak cry, poor responsiveness to stimuli and poor reflexes including poor sucking ability, which result in feeding difficulties and failure to thrive. Infants are usually unable to breastfeed and may require tube feeding. Hypotonia slowly improves over time, but some adults with PWS may continue to have some degree of hypotonia.
Affected infants may also have distinctive facial features including almond-shaped eyes, a thin upper lip, a downturned mouth, a narrow bridge of the nose, a narrow forehead, and a disproportionately long, narrow head (dolichocephaly). Distinctive facial features can be noticeable shortly after birth or may develop slowly over time.
As affected infants grow older, their feeding and appetite will improve, and they will grow appropriately. Typically, between 2-4.5 years of age, their weight increases although there may not be a noticeable change in appetite or caloric intake. Between 4.5-8 years old, appetite and caloric intake usually increases, often thereafter developing a need to eat an extraordinarily large amount of food (hyperphagia) usually because they do not feel satisfied after completing a meal (satiety). In addition, there is a decreased calorie requirement in people with PWS due to low muscle, decreased metabolism and decreased physical activity if not treated with growth hormone replacement. Consequently, overeating, rapid weight gain, and morbid obesity occur if not controlled by others. Not all affected children will go through these stages.
If left uncontrolled and untreated, morbid obesity can develop, potentially leading to life-threatening heart and lung complications, diabetes, high blood pressure (hypertension), and to other serious complications. The compulsion to eat is so overwhelming that people with this disorder, if left unsupervised, may endanger themselves by eating harmful food such as spoiled food or garbage and excessive quantities, harmful to the stomach. Affected children may also exhibit unusual behaviors regarding food including hoarding and/or foraging for food, stealing food and stealing money to buy food.
Some affected individuals have developed serious, life-threatening gastrointestinal complications due to episodes of binge eating. Such complications can include severe bloating (gastric dilatation) with the development of a hole or tear in the intestinal wall (perforation) and tissue loss (necrosis). They are noted to have decreased gastric emptying and swallowing difficulties.
Children with PWS also have varying levels of cognitive impairment, ranging from borderline or low normal intelligence with learning disabilities to mild to moderate intellectual disability. The attainment of motor milestones (e.g., walking or sitting up) and language development are often delayed.
Affected children generally have sweet and loving personalities, but often develop distinct behavioral issues. Such issues can include temper tantrums, stubbornness, obsessive/compulsive behavior, manipulative behavior and skin picking, which can cause chronic open wounds, scarring and infection. In some patients, the behavior profile may be suggestive of autism. Psychosis occurs in approximately 10-20% of late adolescents and young adults. Evidence shows that the type of chromosome 15 abnormality may relate to certain learning and behavioral problems.
Hypogonadism is a common finding in PWS. Hypogonadism refers to inadequate function of the sex organs, the testes in males and the ovaries in females. The sex organs in affected individuals fail to produce sufficient sex hormones, which can result in underdeveloped sex organs, incomplete development at puberty, delayed onset of puberty, and infertility. Genital underdevelopment is evident at birth. Affected males may have a small penis, underdeveloped scrotum, and small testes. Failure of one or both testes to descend (cryptorchidism) is a common finding, as well. Affected females may have an abnormally small clitoris or labia minor. Absence of a menstrual cycle (primary amenorrhea) is common and in some females the initial menstrual period (menarche) may not occur until 30 years of age or older.
Individuals with PWS have growth hormone (GH) insufficiency, a condition characterized by the inadequate secretion of growth hormone from the anterior pituitary gland, a small gland located at the base of the brain that is responsible for the production of several hormones. Children may be significantly below average height based upon sex and age (short stature). GH deficiency affects both children and adults and the final adult height of affected individuals is shorter than unaffected family members. If GH treatment is prescribed at the time of diagnosis, often now during early infancy, then the results are positive with a decrease in the amount of fat seen in PWS patients, an increase in muscle mass and altered body composition. In addition, there is reported evidence of an earlier diagnosis in PWS which reduces the other medical problems (comorbidities) seen in people with this disorder. Hence, GH treatment beginning at an early age in PWS can improve stature and body composition including weight with near normalization of growth by 18 years of age based on PWS specific growth charts in comparison with normal growth charts.
Affected individuals may also have abnormally small hands and feet, side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis) and, in approximately 10% of individuals, a malformed hip (hip dysplasia). Scoliosis can occur at any age including infancy, varies in severity and should be monitored. Sleep problems are common, including excessive daytime sleepiness, reduced rapid eye movement (REM) latency, disruption of the normal sleep cycle, and central and/or obstructive sleep apnea.
Some individuals may have lack of color (pigment) known as hypopigmentation affecting the hair, eyes and skin particularly in those with the chromosome 15q deletion seen in about 60% of those with PWS (discussed in Causes). They may appear fair-skinned compared to other family members. Nearsightedness (myopia) and misaligned eyes (strabismus) may also occur.
Affected individuals may also experience recurrent respiratory infections. Up to 25% of affected individuals may have an underactive thyroid gland (hypothyroidism). In addition, the rates of certain conditions are increased in individuals with PWS including fractures due to decreased bone density (osteopenia), altered temperature sensation, a high vomiting threshold and swelling (edema) and ulcerations of the legs, especially in obese adults. Some individuals may have reduced flow of saliva with abnormally thick, sticky saliva. Additional symptoms that can occur in affected individuals include a high pain threshold, a tendency to bruise easily without known cause and seizures.
Some individuals with PWS may develop central adrenal insufficiency (CAI), a condition characterized by deficiency of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). This hormone is produced by the pituitary gland. One of the main functions of ACTH is to stimulate the adrenal glands to produce cortisol, which helps to regulate blood sugar and the body to deal with stress. In some patients, CAI may only be detectable during periods of stress (e.g., during illness or injury). The exact percentage of affected individuals with CAI and its overall implications to individuals with PWS are not yet fully understood. Natural history causes of death and survival trends in PWS have recently been published and useful to gain knowledge and current understanding and diagnosis with comorbidities in order to better monitor the health status and prognosis of someone with PWS.

