Precocious Puberty

synonyms:
pubertas praecoxsexual precocity

overview:
Precocious puberty means an abnormally early onset of puberty. A sequence of events occurs during which a child develops into a young adult beginning at an unexpectedly early age. Glands that secrete growth and sex hormones begin to function abnormally early in life resulting in this condition. Often, the exact cause of precocious puberty is not known.
Precocious puberty (PP) is a statistical definition; that is, it is the onset of secondary sexual characteristics in children at an age that is two standard deviations younger than the mean age of pubertal onset. The actual age that defines sexual precocity is therefore dependent on the epidemiological data that one uses to define the average age of pubertal onset. Different populations and different time periods will therefore have differing definitions of PP. Classically, in North America, puberty is considered precocious if it begins before age 8 in girls or age 9 in boys. Recently, most likely because of increasing weight in the population, puberty appears to be having an earlier age of onset.

symptoms:
Secondary sexual characteristics include testicular enlargement (>3 ml) and/or pubic hair development in boys, and breast and/or pubic hair development in girls. Other signs suggestive of pubertal onset include acne, growth acceleration, voice changes, vaginal discharge or bleeding, and advanced skeletal maturation. There are many terms used to describe pre-pubertal children who have isolated signs of puberty. These children, however, do not necessarily meet the criteria for true precocious puberty. These terms include premature thelarche, premature adrenarche, premature pubarche and premature menarche. The terminology is often confusing as these are also referred to by some authors as incomplete precocious puberty.
Precocious puberty can occur in several forms. Normally, the hypothalamus initiates puberty by stimulating the pituitary to release gonadotropins (FSH and LH), the hormones which control growth and function of the sex organs. When gonadotropins are released, synthesis and secretion of sex steroids (such as estrogen, progesterone or testosterone) occur, leading to development of secondary sexual characteristics. If this occurs prematurely, a child starts to develop secondary sexual characteristics and proceeds to sexual maturity at an unexpectedly early age. Since the maturing of one’s bones is usually accelerated by this condition, early fusion of the growth plates occurs, resulting in shortening of adult stature. However, during childhood, children with precocious puberty are often taller than their peers.

