Primary Mitochondrial Myopathies

synonyms:
PMM

overview:
Summary
Primary mitochondrial myopathies (PMM) are a group of disorders that are associated with changes in genetic material (e.g., depletions, deletions, or mutations) found within the DNA of mitochondria (mtDNA) or with genes outside the mitochondria (nuclear DNA), affecting predominantly the skeletal muscle. Mitochondria, found by the hundreds within every cell of the body, regulate the production of cellular energy and carry the genetic blueprints for this process within their own unique DNA (mtDNA). These disorders often hamper the ability of affected cells to break down food and oxygen and produce energy. Mitochondria provide more than 90% of the energy used by the body’s tissues; mitochondrial disorders are characterized by a lack of sufficient energy for cells of the body to function properly. High-energy tissues like muscle, brain, or heart tissue are most likely to be affected by mitochondrial disorders. In most mitochondrial disorders, abnormally high numbers of defective mitochondria are present in the cells of the body. Mitochondrial diseases often affect more than one organ system of the body. Most mitochondrial diseases affect the muscles (myopathy). Sometimes, muscle disease is the only or predominant sign of a mitochondrial disorder, thus defined as PMM. There are no disease-modifying treatments for PMM; treatment is aimed at improving or resolving specific symptoms.
Introduction
Primary mitochondrial myopathies (PMM) are genetically defined disorders leading to defects of oxidative phosphorylation (see Causes section below) affecting predominantly, but not exclusively, skeletal muscle. Thus, secondary involvement of mitochondria, frequently observed in other neuromuscular diseases (e.g., Duchenne muscular dystrophy) is not considered PMM. Moreover, individuals with muscle disease symptoms but with other systems are affected (i.e., brain, liver, kidney, etc.) are not considered affected by PMM, and they may fit into a more straightforward clinical syndrome like Kearns-Sayre syndrome, MELAS syndrome, etc. NORD has individual reports on many different forms of mitochondrial disease. (For more information, choose the specific disorder name as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of PMM are varied and how one of these disorders affects one person can be vastly different from how it affects another person. This is true for people with the same disorder, or even people within the same family and with the same genetic variation (mutation). PMM may present at any age, patients with severe generalized muscle involvement typically present early in life, although individuals with milder forms of the disease, or symptoms confined to specific muscles tend to have later presentations. Generally, the earlier the onset (e.g., infancy or early childhood), the more severe a mitochondrial disorder will be.
Myopathy is defined as muscle disease. Mitochondrial myopathy is when muscle fibers cannot function properly because of an underlying defect in mitochondria. The most common presentation, which is estimated to affect about two-thirds of all people classified within this group, is progressive paralysis of certain eye muscles (progressive external ophthalmoplegia). This occurs slowly over time and limits the movements of the eyes so that affected individuals must turn their heads to see things in their peripheral vision. Sometimes, double vision (diplopia) may occur. Affected individuals often experience drooping of both their upper eyelids (bilateral ptosis). Ptosis is caused by paralysis of one of the muscles of the eyelid. Sometimes, this drooping can partially block vision. Other muscles involved in coordinating eye movements may be affected next, growing progressively weaker and eventually resulting in paralysis of certain eye movements. In severe instances, affected individuals may tilt their head.
Progressive external ophthalmoplegia can be a syndrome on its own unassociated with other signs or symptoms, or it can occur as part of a larger syndrome. In some people primary mitochondrial myopathy can cause weakness and paralysis of other facial muscles. This can lead to additional symptoms including difficulty swallowing or slurred speech. Some people can develop problems breathing (respiratory problems).
Some people may have involvement of the muscles of the arms and legs. The hips, shoulder girdle, or neck muscles can also be involved. Sometimes, only muscles in one area of the body are affected: sometimes in multiple areas of the body. Cramping, stiffness, weakness, and paralysis of the affected muscles can potentially develop. Muscle fatigue, muscle pain (myalgia) and muscle wasting can also develop. Exercise intolerance, which is a decreased ability to perform physical tasks, is a common symptom, and is sometimes the first noticeable symptoms in adults. Sometimes, symptoms of primary mitochondrial myopathy may only be present following exercise or physical activity. In severe instances, progressive muscle weakness in the legs can lead to the need for devices to help with walking (e.g., cane) or, eventually, a wheelchair.
EncephalomyopathyEncephalomyopathy (and not PMM as defined above) of infancy or childhood is when there are neurological problems along with problems affecting the muscles. The specific signs and symptoms of encephalomyopathy can vary greatly from person to person. Vision loss can occur because of involvement of the eye or the part of the brain that controls sight. Sensorineural hearing loss can also occur. This type of hearing loss occurs when the nerves within the ear cannot properly send sensory input (sound) to the brain and is not caused by problems with the ear itself. The degree and production of hearing loss can vary. Additional symptoms of encephalopathy in infancy or childhood can include migraines, seizures, or poor coordination (ataxia). Some children may experience delays in reaching develomental milestones (developmental delays). Some children may fail to gain weight and grow as would be otherwise expected (failure to thrive) leading to poor growth. Some children may be shorter than would be expected for age and gender (short stature). Neurological involvement can lead to various problems including difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), difficulty speaking (dysarthria) and muscle weakness and muscle tightness (spasticity). Some individuals experience peripheral neuropathy, which is a condition that occurs when nerves that carry messages to and from the brain and spinal cord to the rest of the body are damaged. Those affected may experience tingling, burning, numbness and stabbing pain in the affected extremities. Mitochondrial diseases that cause neurological problems may be referred to as mitochondrial encephalomyopathies, and not primary mitochondrial myopathies.
Multisystem Mitochondrial DiseasesThere are many genetic disorders that are classified as mitochondrial disease that can have mitochondrial myopathy as a feature. These disorders affect multiple organ systems of the body and include Barth syndrome; growth delay, amino aciduria, cholestasis, iron overload, lactic acidosis and early death (GRACILE syndrome); Kearns-Sayre syndrome; Leigh syndrome; maternally inherited deafness and diabetes (MIDD); mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome; mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like (MELAS); mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE); mitochondrial recessive ataxia syndrome (MIRAS); myoclonus epilepsy with ragged red fibers (MERFF); neuropathy, ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP); and Pearson syndrome. NORD has individual reports on many of these disorders. (For more information, choose the specific disorder name as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)

