Primary Orthostatic Tremor

synonyms:
idiopathic orthostatic tremor

overview:
Summary
Primary orthostatic tremor is a rare movement disorder characterized by a rapid tremor in the legs that occurs when standing. The tremor disappears partially or completely when an affected person is walking or sitting. Individuals with primary orthostatic tremor experience feelings of unsteadiness or imbalance. The tremor is sometimes described as causing “shaky legs” and can cause affected individuals to immediately attempt to sit or walk because of a fear of falling. In many patients, the tremors become more severe over time. Primary orthostatic tremor is a constant problem that can affect the quality of life of affected individuals. The exact cause of primary orthostatic tremor is unknown.
Introduction
Primary orthostatic tremor was first described in 1984 by Heilman. There is controversy within the medical literature regarding whether primary orthostatic tremor is a variant of essential tremor, an exaggerated physiological response to standing still or a distinct clinical entity.

symptoms:
The main symptom of primary orthostatic tremor is the occurrence of a rapid tremor affecting both legs while standing. A tremor is involuntary, rhythmic contractions of various muscles. Orthostatic tremor causes feelings of “vibration”, unsteadiness or imbalance in the legs. The tremor associated with primary orthostatic tremor has such high frequency that it may not visible to the naked eye but can be palpated by touching the thighs or calves, by listening to these muscles with a stethoscope, or by electromyography. The tremor is position-specific (standing) and disappears partially or completely when an affected individual walks, sits or lies down. In many cases, the tremor becomes progressively more severe and feelings of unsteadiness become more intense. Some affected individuals can stand for several minutes before the tremor begins; others can only stand momentarily. Eventually, affected individuals may experience stiffness, weakness and, in rare cases, pain in the legs. Orthostatic tremor, despite usually becoming progressively more pronounced, does not develop into other conditions or affect other systems of the body.
Some affected individuals may also have a tremor affecting the arms. In one case reported in the medical literature, overgrowth of the affected muscles (muscular hypertrophy) occurred in association with primary orthostatic tremor.

