Primary Distal Renal Tubular Acidosis

synonyms:
dRTAfamilial distal primary renal acidosisrenal tubular acidosis type 1

overview:
Summary

Primary distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA) is a rare genetic disorder that affects the ability of the kidneys to remove acid from the blood. This leads to metabolic acidosis. Metabolic acidosis is a condition in which the circulating chemical acids and bases are out of balance. The blood of affected individuals contains too much acid and the urine contains too little acid. Chronic metabolic acidosis can lead to a variety of symptoms. The specific signs, symptoms, and severity of this disorder can vary from one person to another. There are different forms of primary distal renal tubular acidosis. They are caused by a variation (mutation) in one of at least three different genes; theSLC4A1gene, theATP6V0A4gene, and theATP6V1B1gene. A variation in theSLC4A1gene is usually inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, and less often in an autosomal recessive pattern. Variations in theATP6V0A4andATP6V1B1genes are usually inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. A mixture of sodium and potassium salts in the form of sodium citrate or potassium citrate liquid solutions is usually recommended. Liquid preparations, however, have poor palatability and acceptance among patients. In this case, sodium bicarbonate tablets are used instead or in addition to the drinking solution. Often, potassium supplements may be necessary if not included in the alkali therapy.

Introduction

Renal tubular acidosis is a general term for when the kidneys cannot properly remove acid from the body. The kidneys contain nephrons, which are hair-sized structures that are the basic filtering units of the kidneys. Each nephron consists of a glomerulus and a renal tubule. The renal tubule reabsorbs electrolytes such as sodium, chloride and potassium back into the blood so that not too much electrolyte is lost through the urine. The kidneys, through the tubules, reclaim bicarbonate, an electrolyte that helps to maintain the acid-base balance in the body, and then excrete acid through the urine. Acid is produced as a byproduct from a normal diet.
There are several types of renal tubular acidosis. According to their pathophysiological basis, 4 types of RTA were initially categorized. Distal type I RTA or classic RTA usually referred to as distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA) is characterized by a buildup of acids in the blood as a consequence of the distal tubules in the kidneys not being able to rid the body of the daily acid load. This results in an inability to lower urine pH regardless of the degree of acidemia (acid level in the blood). pH is the measure of acidity of liquids. The higher the score more alkaline and less acidic a liquid is. Distal refers to being “distant” from the point of origin. In the nephron, it means the defect occurs away from the point where fluid enters the tubule. Distal renal tubular acidosis occurs because the kidneys fail to secrete acids into the urine.

symptoms:
Primary distal renal tubular acidosis is a highly variable disorder; this means that the disorder affects people differently. Some individuals may only have slightly elevated acid levels and no accompanying symptoms (asymptomatic). Some individuals living with primary dRTA may experience kidney stones and others may not. Generally, people with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance have milder symptoms and a later age of onset of symptoms than people with an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. However, this is not always true and sometimes more severe complications such as growth failure or rickets (bowing of the bones) can affect individuals with dominantly-inherited primary distal renal tubular acidosis.
Primary dRTA can cause severe complications in infants, especially if unrecognized and untreated. Affected infants can experience vomiting, dehydration, and poor growth that can result in being short for their age and gender (short stature). Additional symptoms can include excessive thirst (polydipsia), urinating frequently (polyuria), constipation, muscle weakness, and fatigue. Sometimes, affected individuals may have diminished reflexes. Many of these symptoms are related to metabolic acidosis, a serious and often life-threatening condition. Parents should seek prompt medical attention if a baby shows signs of metabolic acidosis. Some children develop rickets, which is a condition characterized by improper hardening (calcification) of the bones leading to softening and distortion/bowing  of the bones and bone pain. If unrecognized and untreated, primary distal renal tubular acidosis usually causes too much calcium to build up in the kidneys (nephrocalcinosis), and the formation of kidney stones (nephrolithiasis). If untreated, nephrocalcinosis can progress to cause damage to the kidneys resulting in chronic kidney disease (CKD) and reduced kidney function.
In severe instances, if untreated, extreme muscle weakness (muscle paralysis), abnormal heartbeats (cardiac arrhythmia), and episodes of having difficulty breathing or stopping breathing (respiratory arrest) can develop. These symptoms are related to low levels of potassium in the blood (hypokalemia). Potassium is an important electrolyte for the health of nerve and muscles. The kidneys excrete excess potassium through the urine. However, in primary distal renal tubular acidosis the kidneys sometimes excrete too much potassium. Hypokalemia may also contribute to excessive urination (polyuria).
A subset of individuals with the autosomal recessive forms develop sensorineural hearing loss. Sensorineural hearing loss occurs when the nerves within the ear cannot properly send sensory input (sound) to the brain, and is not caused by problems with the ear itself. The degree and progression of sensorineural hearing loss can vary from one child to another, but often affects both ears (bilateral) and is usually severe.
Affected individuals with an autosomal dominant dRTA usually experience a milder form of the disorder with onset of symptoms in adolescence or adulthood. Affected adults may develop reduced bone mass (osteopenia) and abnormal softening of the bones (osteomalacia) and bone pain. Weakened bones may be prone to fracture. Some individuals may develop an abnormal increase in red blood cell mass (erythrocytosis). They may develop kidney stones or kidney issues as adolescents or adults if the disorder is unrecognized and untreated.
Occasionally, individuals with an inherited variation in theSLC4A1gene have experienced the premature breakdown of red blood cells, which leads to low levels of circulating red blood cells  (hemolytic anemia). The main function of red blood cells is to deliver oxygen throughout the body. People with hemolytic anemia can experience shortness of breath (dyspnea), lightheadedness, fatigue, weakness, pale skin color, and headaches.

