Primary Craniosynostosis

synonyms:
craniostenosis

overview:
Primary craniosynostosis is a general term for the improper development of the bones of the skull, which can result in an abnormal head shape in affected individuals. Craniosynostosis refers to the premature fusion of the fibrous joints (sutures) between certain bones of the skull. The severity of primary craniosynostosis can vary from one person to another. While raised intracranial pressure is unlikely with single suture abnormalities with intelligence usually being unaffected, recent data and debate about unrecognized elevated pressure (as well as effects upon cognition) has led to considerable controversy. Until we are able to measure intracranial pressure via non-invasive means, it is likely that the surgical argument between appearance and brain pressure will continue. Primary craniosynostosis may occur as an isolated finding or as part of a syndrome. Patients with syndromic conditions generally have more than one suture involved. Not surprisingly, the therapeutic options and outcomes are dependent upon the degree of suture involvement. The main treatment for primary craniosynostosis is surgery, but not all affected children will require surgery. The exact cause of primary craniosynostosis is unknown, although the skull abnormalities may result from the abnormal hardening (ossification) of the cranial sutures. Primary craniosynostosis is distinguished from secondary craniosynostosis, which occurs because of a primary failure in brain growth which in turn may lead to abnormalities in head shape, occasionally mimicking craniosynostosis.

symptoms:
Primary craniosynostosis is usually apparent at birth or within a few months shortly thereafter (neonatal period). Mild cases may go undiagnosed until early during childhood.
An infant’s skull has seven bones and several joints called sutures. Sutures are made of tough, elastic fibrous tissue and separate the bones from one another. Sutures meet up (intersect) at two spots on the skull called fontanelles, which are better known as an infant’s “soft spots”. The seven bones of an infant’s skull normally do not fuse together until around age two or later. The sutures normally remain flexible until this point. In infants with primary craniosynostosis, the sutures abnormally stiffen or harden causing one or more of the bones of the skull to prematurely fuse together. This in turn, may lead to asymmetric skull growth.
In primary craniosynostosis, the severity and specific shape of an infant’s skull depends upon how many and which sutures / bones are affected. In most cases, only one suture is affected (simple craniosynostosis). Consequently, growth in that area of the skull is hindered, but growth (in order to accommodate the infant’s expanding brain) in the unaffected areas continues. This results in an abnormal skull shape.
In most cases of primary craniosynostosis, affected children usually have normal intelligence and do not have other abnormalities besides the skull malformation. However, when multiple sutures are affected, the skull may be unable to expand enough to accommodate the growing brain. If left untreated, this can cause increased pressure within the skull (intracranial pressure) and can potentially result in cognitive impairment or developmental delays. Increased pressure within the skull can also cause vomiting, headaches, and decreased appetite. In some rare cases, additional symptoms can develop including seizures, misalignment of the spine, or eye abnormalities.
Craniosynostosis may be subdivided based upon the exact sutures and bones involved. Most cases of primary craniosynostosis involve only one suture. Each subdivision results in a different characteristic pattern of skull development. The subdivisions of craniosynostosis include sagittal synostosis, coronal synostosis, metopic synostosis, and lambdoid synostosis. (Synostosis is a medical term for the fusion of bones that are normally separate.)
The most common form of craniosynostosis is sagittal synostosis (hardening of the sagittal suture). The sagittal suture is the joint that runs from the front to the back of the skull and that separates the two bones that form the sides of the skull (parietal bones). Premature closure of this suture results in an abnormally long, narrow head (scaphocephaly) due to the restricted sideways growth (width) of the skull.
Coronal synostosis refers to the premature closure of one of the coronal sutures, which are the joints that separate the two frontal bones from the two parietal bones. The coronal sutures extend across the skull, almost from one ear to the other. The two coronal sutures meet at the “soft spot” (anterior fontanelle) located toward the front and of the skull. The skull may appear twisted or lopsided and the forehead and orbit of the eye may appear flattened on one side whereas the opposite side of the forehead may appear to bulge as part of the brain’s unrestricted growth on this side. This specific skull shape is sometimes referred to as frontal plagiocephaly. When both coronal sutures are involved, it causes the skull to appear abnormally short and disproportionally wide (brachycephaly).
Metopic synostosis refers to the premature fusion of the metopic suture, which is the joint that separates the two frontal bones of the skull. It runs from the top of the forehead to the anterior fontanelle (frontal soft spot). This condition causes a keel-shaped forehead and eyes that are set closer together than normal (hypotelorism). When viewed from above the skull may appear to be shaped triangularly, a condition referred to as trigonocephaly. A ridge may be apparent running down the middle of the forehead, which may appear narrow. The soft spot found toward the back of the skull (anterior fontanelle) is usually absent or prematurely closed. The presence of a metopic ridge (a palpable/ visible prominence over the midline of the forehead) is relatively common and not all individuals with this ridge have trigonocephaly.
Lambdoid synostosis, also known as posterior plagiocephaly, is the premature fusion of the lambdoid suture, which is the joint that separates the bone that forms the lower back of the skull (occipital bone) from the parietal bones. One side of the rear of the head may appear flatter than the other when viewed from above. The ear on the affected side may be pulled backward and stick out farther than the other ear. A small bump may also be present behind the ear on the affected side. Whereas true lambdoid synostosis is extremely rare (1/200,000), this should not be confused with the nearly ubiquitous lambdoid positional plagiocephaly. Fortunately, there are physical features that help to differentiate these two conditions and children with positional plagiocephaly usually have compensatory overgrowth at the forehead on the same side.
In rare cases, individuals with primary craniosynostosis have premature fusion of multiple sutures. A specific form of craniosynostosis involving multiple sutures is known as Kleeblattschadel (which is German for “cloverleaf” ) deformity. Fusion of multiple sutures causes the skull to appear flattened and divided into three lobes, thus resembling a cloverleaf. Kleeblattschadel deformity usually occurs as part of a syndrome.

