Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis

synonyms:
chronic obliterative cholangitisfibrosing cholangitisPSCstenosing cholangitis

overview:
Summary
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a rare progressive disorder characterized by inflammation, thickening, and abnormal formation of fibrous tissue (fibrosis) within the passages that carry bile from the liver (bile ducts). Both the bile ducts within the liver (intrahepatic) and outside the liver (extrahepatic) are affected. This often results in the obstruction or interruption of bile flow from the liver (cholestasis). Symptoms associated with PSC include fatigue and itching (pruritus), followed by yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes, and whites of the eyes (jaundice). Affected individuals may also have dark urine, light-colored stools, abdominal pain, and/or nausea. In some cases, the liver may also become abnormally enlarged (hepatomegaly). Scarring of the liver (cirrhosis) eventually develops and many individuals will ultimately require a liver transplant. According to the medical literature, approximately 60 to 80 percent of individuals with PSC also have inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), most often ulcerative colitis. The relationship between these disorders and the exact cause of PSC are not fully understood.
Introduction
PSC is a complex disorder and the cause (etiology) and underlying manner the disease develops (pathogenesis) are not fully understood. PSC was first described in the medical literature in 1867. Some researchers believe that PSC represents a group of disorders or a disorder with several distinct subtypes (e.g. PSC with IBD or without IBD). It is likely that PSC may have different underlying causes in different individuals. PSC is a rapidly evolving disease concept and information about PSC is constantly changing and emerging as researchers work to better understand this disorder.

symptoms:
Primary sclerosing cholangitis primarily involves the bile ducts. The formation of bile is one of the functions of the liver. Bile is a fluid that contains water, certain minerals that carry an electric charge (electrolytes), and other materials including bile salts, phospholipids, cholesterol, and an orange-yellow pigment (bilirubin) that is a byproduct of the natural breakdown of the hemoglobin of red blood cells. Bile flow accomplishes two important tasks within the body, it aids in digestion and absorption of dietary fats, vitamins, and other nutrients and helps eliminate excess cholesterol, bilirubin, waste, and toxins from the body. Therefore, a problem with normal bile flow often results in malabsorption of vital nutrients and the accumulation of toxic materials in the body.
PSC is characterized by episodes of interrupted or obstructed bile flow from the liver (cholestasis), resulting from inflammation, thickening, and/or abnormal formation of fibrous tissue (fibrosis) within the bile ducts. The specific symptoms, progression and severity of PSC can vary greatly from one individual to another. Initially, many affected individuals may not have any noticeable symptoms (asymptomatic) or only mild symptoms. Some individuals will only display mild symptoms for many years.
Common initial symptoms of PSC are fatigue, abdominal discomfort, and itching (pruritus). Itching can potentially be severe and even disabling. When the flow of bile from the liver is blocked, the bile may be absorbed into the bloodstream, resulting in yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes, and whites of the eyes (obstructive jaundice). Additional symptoms include a general feeling of ill health (malaise); abdominal pain, especially the upper right portion of the abdomen; nausea; dark urine; light-colored stools; unintended weight loss, and/or abnormal enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly) and/or spleen (splenomegaly).
Some individuals may develop deficiency of certain vitamins, including vitamins A, D, E and K. These are fat-soluble vitamins. Bile normally helps fat to be broken down and these vitamins to be absorbed by the body.
Some individuals with chronic liver disease develop metabolic bone disease, which may be referred to as hepatic osteodystrophy. Affected individuals can eventually develop osteoporosis, a condition in which the bones become brittle and fragile. Individuals with osteoporosis are prone to repeated fractures. In severe cases, fractures may occur from even mild stresses such as coughing. Bones in the wrist, hips and spine are often affected.
In some cases, affected individuals may experience episodes of fever, chills, and night sweats resulting from infection of the bile ducts (bacterial cholangitis). In addition, PSC may progress to cause scarring and damage to the liver (cirrhosis) and increased blood pressure in the veins carrying blood from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract back to the heart through the liver (portal hypertension). Portal hypertension can result in serious complications including fluid accumulation in the stomach (ascites), bleeding from blood vessels within the esophagus, stomach and rectum, and hepatic encephalopathy, a brain disorder that ranges from a subtle condition with no outward signs or symptoms to a severe condition that can cause severe complications, such as confusion and coma.
As individuals with PSC age, they often eventually develop life-threatening complications such as liver (hepatic) failure. Individuals with PSC are at a greater risk than the general population of developing a form of cancer that affects the bile ducts (cholangiocarcinoma). Approximately 8-15% of affected individuals eventually develop cholangiocarcinoma. Affected individuals are also at risk of developing gallbladder cancer.
In approximately 60 to 80 percent of cases, individuals with PSC also have ulcerative colitis, an inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) of unknown cause that is characterized by chronic inflammation and ulceration of the lining of the major portion of the large intestine (colon). PSC is also associated with Crohn’s disease, another form of IBD. These conditions can be mild or even “silent” causing no apparent symptoms (asymptomatic). Individuals with PSC and IBD (and particularly ulcerative colitis) or Crohn’s disease are at a greater risk of developing colon cancer compared to individuals with only one of these conditions or to the general population.
In addition to IBD, numerous autoimmune or immune-mediated disorders have been reported to occur in association with PSC. Such disorders include sarcoidosis, thyroid disease, Peyronie’s disease, retroperitoneal fibrosis, psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, Celiac disease, Sjogren’s syndrome, chronic pancreatitis, lupus, diabetes mellitus, Wegener’s granulomatosis, pyoderma gangrenosum, Grave’s disease, Langerhans cell histiocytosis and certain immunodeficiency disorders. The exact relationship between these disorders and PSC is unknown. It is possible that PSC develops as a secondary condition to some of these disorders. (For more information on these disorders, choose exact disorder name as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)

