Primary Myelofibrosis

synonyms:
agnogenic myeloid metaplasia (AMM)chronic idiopathic myelofibrosis (CIMF)idiopathic myelofibrosisIMmyelofibrosis with myeloid metaplasiaPMF

overview:
Summary

Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) is a rare bone marrow disorder that is characterized by abnormalities in blood cell production (hematopoiesis) and scarring (formation of fibrous tissue) within the bone marrow. Bone marrow is the soft, spongy tissue that fills the center of most bones. Bone marrow contains specialized cells called hematopoietic stem cells that grow and eventually develop into one of the three main types of blood cells: red blood cells, white blood cells or platelets. In primary myelofibrosis, a change in the DNA of a single hematopoietic stem cell causes the abnormal cell to continually reproduce itself. Eventually, these abnormal cells crowd out normal, healthy cells in the marrow and, along with scarring within the marrow, disrupt the production of red and white blood cells and platelets.
The symptoms associated with primary myelofibrosis vary and are related to the abnormalities affecting blood cell production. Affected individuals may not have symptoms at the time of diagnosis (asymptomatic) may remain symptom-free for many years. Eventually, affected individuals may develop fatigue, fever, frequent infections, pale skin, night sweats and unexplained weight loss. An enlarged (spleen) is a common finding. An enlarged liver (hepatomegaly) may also occur.
In approximately 50 percent of patients, a mutation of theJAK2gene has been detected. The exact role this abnormal gene plays in the development of the disorder is unknown.

Introduction

Primary myelofibrosis belongs to a group of diseases known as the myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs). This group of disorders is characterized by the overproduction (proliferation) of one or more of the three main blood cell lines – red or white blood cells or platelets. Three other disorders are commonly classified as MPNs: chronic myeloid leukemia, essential thrombocythemia and polycythemia vera. Myelofibrosis may occur as a secondary characteristic of polycythemia vera or essential thrombocytyemia. Because the MPNs are characterized by uncontrolled cell growth, they may also be classified as blood cancers.

symptoms:
Most of the symptoms of primary myelofibrosis are related to abnormalities affecting the production of the three main types of blood cells: red and white cells and platelets. Most blood cells are produced in the bone marrow and released into the bloodstream to travel throughout the body performing their specific functions. Red blood cells deliver oxygen to the body, white blood cells help in fighting off infections and platelets allow the body to form clots to stop bleeding.
In primary myelofibrosis there are often low levels of circulating red blood cells, a condition known as anemia. Red blood cells may also be misshapen (i.e., shaped like teardrops) and underdeveloped (immature). White blood cells and platelets are also misshapen and immature. However, there are often too many white blood cells produced. There may be abnormally low or high levels of platelets.
The specific symptoms and progression of primary myelofibrosis vary from person to person. Some individuals may not exhibit symptoms for many years (asymptomatic). Eventually, individuals with anemia may experience tiredness, shortness of breath, weakness, lightheadedness, irritability, headaches, and pale skin color. Fever and excessive sweating at night (night sweats) may also occur. Although there may be too many white blood cells, these abnormal cells do not function properly and fail to properly fight off infection. Therefore, affected individuals may have an increased risk of contracting bacterial and fungal infections. Abnormalities in platelet production may make individuals more susceptible to excessive bruising following minimal injury and to spontaneous bleeding from the mucous membranes, especially those of the gums and nose.
An abnormally enlarged spleen is a common finding in individuals with primary myelofibrosis. Splenomegaly may cause pain or a feeling of fullness in the upper left portion of the stomach. Splenomegaly can also cause severe pain in the upper left shoulder (referred pain). Abnormal enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly) occurs in approximately two-thirds of patients. Abnormal enlargement of the spleen or liver may occur, in part, due to extramedullary hematopoiesis, an abnormal process where blood cells develop outside of the bone marrow.
Extramedullary hematopoiesis may also cause masses (fibrohematopoietic tumors) to form in the gastrointestinal tract, lungs, skin, liver, spleen and other areas of the body. Symptoms associated with these tumors occur due to compression of nearby structures or impaired function of an affected organ. Fibrohematopoietic tumors in the gastrointestinal tract may lead to excessive bleeding, tumors in the brain can cause neurological complications, and tumors near the spine can compress the spinal cord.
Bone or joint pain may develop later in the course of the disease. Additional complications may occur in some cases of primary myelofibrosis including increased blood pressure of the main artery delivering blood to the liver (portal hypertension) due to excess blood flow from the spleen. The liver cannot absorb the excess blood flow, which may be forced into small veins within the stomach or esophagus. These veins may expand and eventually rupture causing bleeding (esophageal or gastric varices). Increased blood pressure of the main artery of lungs (pulmonary hypertension) may also occur.
In approximately 20 percent of individuals, primary myelofibrosis will progress to acute myelogenous leukemia, a specific type of blood cancer.

