Primary Familial Brain Calcification

synonyms:
Fahr's disease, formerlyfamilial idiopathic basal ganglia calcificationprimary bilateral brain calcificationstriopallidodentate calcinosis

overview:
Primary familial brain calcification (PFBC) is a rare neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the presence of abnormal calcium/hydroxyapatite deposits (calcifications) in the brain. The clinical presentations generally attributed to these brain calcifications are highly heterogeneous, ranging from asymptomatic patients to severe cases with progressive neuropsychiatric features. To date, disease-causing changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in six genes have been associated with PFBC:SLC20A2, PDGFB, PDGFRB, XPR1, MYORGandJAM-2.  PFBC has recently become the preferred name for this condition because variants in specific genes are now known to be the cause of the condition. Previously, familial idiopathic basal ganglia calcification was the preferred name, and Fahr’s disease is often used for either familial or sporadic brain calcification, and it is unknown if these are the same or different diseases.

symptoms:
PFBC is characterized by symmetric and bilateral brain calcifications mainly in the basal ganglia, but also seen in the cerebellum, thalami, cerebral white matter and/or pons. These calcium phosphate deposits are commonly found in the fourth to fifth decade of life, while symptoms usually begin in the third to fifth decade of life, even though some individuals with PFBC may be clinically asymptomatic for several decades. PFBC is rare among children but, when present, most of these children present with seizures. Neuropsychiatric and movement disorders are the main PFBC clinical presentations in adults.
Early symptoms may include clumsiness, fatigue, slow or slurred speech and difficulty swallowing (dysphagia). Progressive deterioration of mental/cognitive abilities (dementia) and loss of previous motor development are accompanied by spastic paralysis and in some patients, twisting movements of the hands and feet (athetosis). Features of Parkinson disease found in this disorder may include tremors and rigidity (Parkinsonism), a masklike facial expression, shuffling walk and a pill rolling motion of the fingers. Muscle cramping (dystonia), uncontrollable spasmodic irregular movements characterized by irregular, rapid, jerky moves (chorea) and seizures can also occur. Occasional symptoms include sensory changes, headaches and urinary incontinence. Other associated symptoms include loss of contact with reality (psychosis), mood swings, depression and loss of acquired motor skills. As the condition progresses, paralysis may develop associated with increased muscle stiffness (rigidity) and restricted movements (spastic paralysis). Recently, stroke in young people with no risk factors has been related toMYORGgene variants (Yang et al, 2022).
A recent study indicated that Parkinsonism was the most frequent symptom in a group of 44 PFBC patients, followed by cognitive impairment, psychiatric symptoms and cerebellar signs (Ramos et al., 2018). Other analyses have also suggested that males are more severely affected than females, especially those who haveSLC20A2gene variants, followed by those withPDGFBandPDGFRBgene variants (Nicolas et al., 2015).

