Primary Hyperoxaluria

synonyms:
oxalosisPH

overview:
Summary
Primary hyperoxaluria (PH) is a group of rare genetic metabolic disorders that are characterized by the accumulation of a substance known as oxalate in the kidneys and other organ systems of the body. Affected individuals lack functional levels of a specific enzyme that normally prevents the accumulation of oxalate. There are three main types of PH – PH types I, II, and III – differentiated by the specific enzyme that is deficient. In the kidneys, excess oxalate binds with calcium to form a hard compound (calcium oxalate) that is the main component of kidney and urinary stones. Common symptoms include the formation of stones throughout the urinary tract (urolithiasis) and kidneys (nephrolithiasis) and progressively increased levels of calcium in the kidneys (nephrocalcinosis). Chronic, recurrent stone formation and the accumulation of calcium oxalate in kidney tissue can cause chronic kidney disease, which can ultimately progress to kidney failure. Eventually, kidney function can deteriorate to the point where oxalate begins to accumulate in other organ systems. Overall, the symptoms and severity of PH may vary greatly from one person to another. Chronic kidney disease and kidney failure may already be present when a diagnosis is first made. PH is a treatable disorder and complications may be minimized with early recognition and prompt treatment.
PH is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. The genetic mutations that cause PH control the production of different enzymes found primarily in the liver in PH type I and PH type II, and in the kidney and liver in PH type III. The significance of the enzyme found in the kidney remains to be determined.

symptoms:
PH has characteristic or “core” symptoms, but some aspects of these disorders are still not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified cases (especially with PH types II and III), the lack of large clinical studies, and multiple genes influencing the disorders prevent physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Parents should talk to their children’s physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
The age of onset, progression, severity and specific symptoms that develop can vary greatly from one person to another, even in individuals with the same subtype and even among members of the same family. Some individuals may have mild cases that go undiagnosed well into adulthood; others may develop severe complications during infancy. In some individuals kidney involvement may progress slowly, while in others it may progress rapidly.
PRIMARY HYPEROXALURIA TYPE IPH type I is the most severe and most common of the three types. It is estimated to account for 70 to 80% of all diagnosed PH patients. The severe infantile form is associated with the failure to gain weight and grow at the expected rate for age and gender (failure to thrive), widespread calcium oxalate crystal deposits in the kidneys, and/or kidney stones or stones elsewhere in the urinary tract such as the bladder or urethra. Kidney and urinary stones can cause a variety of symptoms including blood in the urine (hematuria), painful urination (dysuria), the urge to urinate often, abdominal pain (renal colic), blockage of the urinary tract, and repeated urinary tract infections. PH type I often causes progressive kidney damage and kidney failure.
When PH type I develops during childhood or adolescence, the disorder is usually characterized by recurrent stones in the kidney or elsewhere in the urinary tract such as the bladder or urethra. Younger children may experience difficulty controlling their urine and/or bedwetting (enuresis). Progressive kidney damage leading to kidney failure may develop.
Some individuals are not diagnosed with PH type I until adulthood and only experience occasional or recurrent episodes of kidney stones. In some cases, these individuals may develop kidney failure due to the obstruction of the kidneys by stones. Although usually described as a mild form of the disorder, approximately 20-50% of individuals diagnosed with PH type I in adulthood have advanced kidney disease or even kidney failure. In rare cases, a diagnosis may not be made until a kidney transplant rapidly fails due to recurrent disease. If kidney function declines in a person with PH, oxalate begins to accumulate in other organ systems of the body particularly bone, skin, retinas in the eyes, the middle layer of the wall of the heart (myocardium), various blood vessels, and the central nervous system. This is known as systemic oxalosis and occurs in patients with PH once oxalate levels in the blood become very high and kidney disease is advanced. Depending upon the organ system involved, affected individuals can develop additional symptoms including bone pain; multiple fractures; abnormal hardening and density of bone (osteosclerosis); anemia that is difficult to treat (erythropoietin-resistant anemia); degeneration of the cranial nerve that transmits light signals to the brain (optic atrophy) and disease of the retina (retinopathy); root resorption, pulp exposure, tooth mobility, and dental pain; damage to the nerves outside of the central nervous system (peripheral neuropathy); heart block, irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias), inflammation of the myocardium (myocarditis), and cardioembolic stroke; narrowing of a blood vessel due to spasms of the vessel (vasospasm); joint disease (arthropathy); enlargement of the liver and/or spleen (hepatosplenomegaly); and purplish mottling of the skin (livedo reticularis); tissue death (necrosis) on the hands and feet (peripheral gangrene); and a skin rash caused by calcium deposits in the skin (calcinosis cutis metastatica).
PRIMARY HYPEROXALURIA TYPE IIPH type II usually presents during childhood and the disorder is more likely to have a milder presentation than PH type I. It is thought to account for approximately 10% of PH cases. Affected individuals can develop similar symptoms and have similar oxalate levels to those seen in individuals with PH type I but usually develop kidney and urinary stones less often. PH type II can eventually progress to cause kidney failure, although this often happens later than it does in PH type I. When kidney function declines, the accumulation of oxalate in other organ systems of the body as described above may also occur.
PRIMARY HYPEROXALURIA TYPE IIIBecause so few cases of PH type III have been identified, it is difficult to make definite statements about disease severity and progression, but it is estimated to be at least as common as PH type II, accounting for approximately 10% of cases. The disorder is considered milder than PH types I or II. Affected individuals may have no symptoms, or may only experience kidney stone formation. Symptoms due to frequent kidney stones can begin at an early age, but overall decline in kidney function is slowest with type III, and oxalate levels are lowest. Typical signs and symptoms include stone formation in the urinary tract in the first decade of life that can persist throughout adulthood. Nephrocalcinosis and chronic kidney disease are uncommon. Advanced kidney disease has rarely been reported.
UNCLASSIFIED PRIMARY HYPEROXALURIAIn some cases, patients present with signs and symptoms typical of PH but lack any identifiable mutation in the known associated genesAGXT,GRHPR, orHOGA1. They are currently diagnosed with unclassified PH, leading researchers to suspect there are other yet to be identified genetic mutations that can cause PH.

