Primary Gastric Lymphoma

synonyms:
non-Hodgkin gastric lymphomaprimary Hodgkin's lymphoma of the stomachstomach lymphoma, non-Hodgkins type

overview:
Summary
Primary gastric lymphoma is a general term for a type of cancer that originates within the stomach. Approximately 90 percent of patients with primary gastric lymphoma have either mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) gastric lymphoma or diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) of the stomach. MALT gastric lymphoma is often associated with infection with theHelicobacter pyloribacterium. Within the medical literature, controversy exists regarding the exact definition, classification and staging of primary gastric lymphoma.
The term lymphoma refers to cancer that arises in the lymphatic system. As part of the immune system, the lymphatic system helps protect the body against infection and disease and has a network of tubes known as lymph vessels that drain a thin watery fluid known as lymph from different areas of the body into the bloodstream. Lymph collects in the tiny spaces between tissue cells and contains proteins, fats and certain white blood cells known as lymphocytes. As lymph moves through the lymphatic system, it is filtered by a network of small structures known as lymph nodes that help to remove microorganisms (e.g., viruses, bacteria, etc.) and other waste (dead cells and their fragments) from the bloodstream.
Most types of lymphoma result from errors in the production of a type of white blood cell (lymphocyte) or transformation of a single lymphocyte into a malignant (cancerous) cell. Abnormal, uncontrolled growth of malignant lymphocytes leads to enlargement of a specific lymph node region or regions. Involvement of other lymphatic tissues, such as the spleen and bone marrow and spread to other body tissues and organs can lead to life-threatening complications. The specific symptoms (fever, night sweats, itchiness, etc.) and physical findings (weight loss, enlarged spleen, lumps over the neck or axilla, etc.) may vary from person to person depending upon the extent and region(s) of involvement.
Most cases of lymphoma arise in the lymph nodes. When lymphoma arises outside the lymph nodes, it is referred to as extra nodal lymphoma. Primary gastric lymphoma is the most common form of extra nodal lymphoma.
Most cases of primary gastric lymphoma are B-cell subtypes of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). NHL may be broadly classified into lymphomas that arise from abnormal B-lymphocytes (B-cell lymphoma) and those derived from abnormal T-lymphocytes (T-cell lymphoma).
The types of NHL may also be based upon certain characteristics of the cancer cells as seen under a microscope and how quickly they may tend to grow and spread. For example, NHL may be characterized as “low-grade” (or indolent), meaning it tends to grow slowly and result in few associated symptoms, or “intermediate-” to “high-grade” (aggressive) lymphomas, which typically grow rapidly, requiring prompt treatment. MALT gastric lymphoma is generally an indolent (slow growing) lymphoma; DLBCL of the stomach is generally a more aggressive lymphoma. Rarely, individuals may have both low- and high-grade lymphomas at the same time.

symptoms:
The symptoms of primary gastric lymphoma are usually vague and nonspecific, seen in other conditions beside cancer. In many people, there may be no noticeable physical findings upon diagnosis. Specific symptoms can be very different from one person to another. Abdominal pain or cramping is probably the most common and may be one of the first symptoms noted.
Additional symptoms that may occur in individuals with primary gastric lymphoma include a feeling of stomach fullness after only eating a little food (early satiety), abdominal tenderness, nausea, vomiting, unintended weight loss, a general feeling of poor health (malaise) and indigestion. Bleeding from the stomach may occur in some individuals and can also be the first noticeable sign of primary gastric lymphoma. A mass large enough to be able to be felt when applying pressure to the stomach may also be present in some people with advanced cases.
Less frequently, weakness, fatigue, night sweats, jaundice (yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes), fever and dysphagia (difficulty swallowing) may occur. Additional less common findings associated with primary gastric lymphoma include abnormal enlargement of the liver or spleen, obstruction of the gastrointestinal tract and development of a hole or tear in the wall of the stomach (perforation).

