Primary Biliary Cholangitis

synonyms:
PBC

overview:
Primary biliary cholangitis (PBC) is a chronic (e.g.,long lasting), progressive liver disorder that mostly affects women and usually appears during middle age. Approximately 25% of patients with PBC are women younger than 40 years of age, and about 10% of patients are men. PBC leads to inflammation and scarring of the small bile ducts (the ‘plumbing’ system of the liver which transports bile, the substance that helps digest fat). When PBC is very severe, it can lead to yellow discoloration of the skin (jaundice), which occurs when bilirubin levels rise above 2 to 3mg/dL or 34 to 51 µmol/L). If PBC is untreated or there is incomplete response to medical treatment, it can lead to cirrhosis (e.g., scarring of the entire liver), which can lead to liver failure. PBC is divided into four stages from stage 1 (early disease, without significant scarring of the liver) to stage 4 (cirrhosis). Although the exact cause of PBC is unknown, it is thought that it is likely due to a combination of factors such as autoimmune (when a person’s own immune system attacks their body), genetic, and environmental factors.

symptoms:
The most common symptoms of PBC are:•Fatigue•Pruritus (itchiness)•Jaundice
The cause of fatigue in PBC is unknown and can be very debilitating. Unfortunately, there are no accepted drug treatments for the fatigue in PBC, though research for medicines that can help fatigue is ongoing. Since fatigue is very common, it is important to rule out other causes of fatigue. The fatigue in PBC is not linked to the severity of the liver disease. Patients can have early disease but still have profound fatigue, while others with more advanced disease may have no fatigue at all. The fatigue is also not linked to how quickly the disease will get worse.
Like fatigue, the cause of pruritus in PBC is unknown and it is not always linked to the severity of the liver disease. It is likely that the pruritus is caused by substances in the blood, rather than in the skin, unlike pruritus caused by allergies. Fortunately, unlike fatigue, there are a number of drug treatments for pruritus that work for most people (see below under Standard Therapies).
As mentioned above, jaundice occurs when PBC is very severe. Sometimes, it can be reversed with treatment of the PBC, but sometimes, patients who have jaundice will require a liver transplant. Jaundice usually happens when the liver is so damaged that the normal function of the liver is impaired.
Complications of PBC:•Portal hypertension (ascites, varices, hepatic encephalopathy)•Fat malabsorption•Fat deposits•Osteoporosis/osteomalacia
Portal hypertension usually occurs after a patient develops cirrhosis. It can lead to fluid build-up in the abdomen (ascites), or big veins (similar to varicose veins) in the esophagus (the structure where food goes when you swallow). It can also lead to confusion (due to a build-up of toxins that are not removed by the liver).
Fat malabsorption occurs only when PBC is very advanced, and it is very rare. If it does happen, it will cause diarrhea, oily stool and weight loss. Fat deposits under the skin are more common, as there is a higher amount of cholesterol in the blood of people with PBC. These fat deposits appear as yellow bumps beneath the skin, usually under the eyes or over joints. The high cholesterol levels in PBC are not linked to an increase risk of heart attack, strokes or other complications.
Osteoporosis is the most common complication in PBC, though it is also very common in people without PBC. It leads to thinning of the bones and can be treated with medicines for the bones.
Other autoimmune diseases can occur more commonly in patients with PBC. Some examples of these other diseases include:
•Thyroid disease•Sjogren’s syndrome: A disease that causes dry eyes and dry mouth•Celiac disease: A disease that affects the small intestine, causing an allergy to gluten (the proteins in products with wheat, rye, bran)

