Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia

synonyms:
immotile cilia syndromePCD

overview:
Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a genetic condition in which the microscopic organelles (cilia) in the respiratory system do not function properly. Ciliary dysfunction prevents the clearance of mucous from the lungs, paranasal sinuses and middle ears. Bacteria and other irritants in the mucous lead to frequent respiratory infections. Kartagener syndrome is a type of PCD associated with a mirror-image orientation of the heart and other internal organs (situs inversus). PCD usually follows autosomal recessive inheritance, but rare cases of X-linked and autosomal dominant inheritance have been observed.

symptoms:
The severity of symptoms of primary ciliary dyskinesia varies in affected individuals. Symptoms often begin shortly after birth and can include coughing, gagging, choking and neonatal respiratory distress (lung atelectasis). Affected individuals often experience chronic sinus, middle ear and lung infections as well as chronic coughing, excess mucus and hearing loss. The recurring respiratory infections can lead to irreversible scarring and dilatation in the bronchi (bronchiectasis) and severe lung damage.
Cilia are also present in the ventricles of the brain and in the reproductive system, so ciliary dysfunction can also affect other body systems. Affected males are typically infertile because movement of sperm (motility) is abnormal. PCD may also be associated with infertility and ectopic pregnancy in females.
Movement of cilia may also be important in organ placement in the developing embryo. Approximately 50% of individuals with PCD have Kartagener syndrome in which the internal organs including the heart, liver, spleen and intestine are on the opposite side of the body (situs inversus totalis). Some individuals with PCD have a condition called heterotaxy (situs ambiguus) in which internal organs are abnormally positioned and have abnormal structure. Approximately, 12% of PCD patients have heterotaxy and a subset of those have congenital heart defects that can be serious and life threatening.

