Primary Lateral Sclerosis

synonyms:
Central Motor Neuron DiseasePLS

overview:
Primary lateral sclerosis (PLS) is a rare, neuromuscular disorder that affects the central motor neurons and is characterized by progressive weakness and stiffness of the muscles of the legs. Such weakness may progress to affect the arms and the muscles at the base of the brain (bulbar muscles). Less frequently, the muscles of the face are affected. In most cases, the disorder affects adults during midlife. The exact cause of primary lateral sclerosis is unknown.

symptoms:
Primary lateral sclerosis is a rare disorder affecting the nerve cells that control voluntary muscles. In most cases, the muscles of the legs are involved first. However, in some cases, the disorder may begin in the muscles of the hands or tongue.
In many cases, the initial symptom of primary lateral sclerosis is progressive muscle weakness and stiffness of the voluntary muscles of legs. The disorder usually affects one leg and then progresses to the other. Affected individuals experience involuntary muscle spasms (spasticity) that result in slow, stiff movements of the legs. As a result, affected individuals may have difficulty walking and maintaining balance, may experience cramping of affected muscles, and may appear clumsy. As the disorder progresses, affected individuals may have increasing difficulties walking and may eventually require a cane or similar device to assist in walking.
Although primary lateral sclerosis begins in the legs, it progresses to affect the muscles of the hands and at the base of the brain. As a result, affected individuals may also exhibit difficulty forming words (dysarthria) and difficulty swallowing (dysphagia). In some cases, these symptoms may precede the development of muscle weakness in the legs. Some affected individuals may experience loss of bladder control late in the course of primary lateral sclerosis.
The specific course of primary lateral sclerosis varies from case to case. The disorder may progress rapidly within a few years or slowly over a few decades.

