Primary Lymphedema

synonyms:
hereditary lymphedema

overview:
Summary
Primary lymphedema is a genetic condition affecting the lymphatic system and is characterized by chronic swelling (edema) of affected parts of the body, usually most commonly the lower limbs. The lymphatic system is an extensive network of vessels, nodes and ducts involved in whole body fluid homeostasis and immune cell trafficking, and lipid absorption in the gut. Errors in development may result in underdevelopment (hypoplasia/aplasia) or overgrowth (hyperplasia) of lymphatic vessels. The malformed vessels lack capacity to collect and return lymph to the venous circulation and protein-rich fluid accumulates in the subcutaneous tissues under the outermost layer of skin (epidermis) of the affected area. This leads to swelling (lymphedema) that may result in mild (< 20%) to severe (> 40%) enlargement of affected limbs. An inflammatory process, stimulated by the retained fluid, causes changes in the quality of the surface of the skin, thickening or hardening of the tissues (fibrosis) and stimulation of fat (adipose) deposition. Psychological distress related to appearance and necessary self-management practices is common. There is no cure for primary lymphedema. However, an effective compression regimen, active lifestyle and maintenance of normal body weight will limit progression of the condition.
Primary lymphedema is caused by abnormalities in lymphatic vasculature presumably due to disease-causing genetic variants. Most (70%) individuals with primary lymphedema have a condition that occurs sporadically (irregularly) with no known family history and/or confirmed genetic variant. In some patients, lymphedema may be the only clinical feature while in others lymphedema may be the main or a minor clinical feature of a multisystem disorder (syndrome) and may be present in systemic conditions involving internal organs and structures (complex lymphatic anomaly).
In contrast, secondary lymphedema is an acquired condition resulting from damage from surgery, tumor, radiation therapy, trauma or infection in the absence of any anatomical abnormalities.
Introduction
Historically, primary lymphedema has been characterized by age of onset: type I (congenital or up to 2 years of age); type II lymphedema praecox (from 2 to 35 years of age) and lymphedema tarda (after 35 years of age). Medical experts now recommend describing the onset of symptoms using developmental terms such as infancy, childhood, adolescence and adulthood. Congenital-onset (or infancy) primary lymphedema may be associated with variants in theFLT4gene, while primary lymphedema occurring later, usually near adolescence, has been associated with variants in theFOXC2gene. Currently, most patients with primary lymphedema are not diagnosed with a disease-causing gene variant. Many new target genes have recently been identified, and research is ongoing.

symptoms:
The main symptom associated with primary lymphedema is edema in different parts of the body due to accumulation of lymph in the soft layers of tissue under the epidermis. Swelling frequently occurs in one or both legs, but may also be present in the trunk, face, genitalia and arms. When lymphedema develops in the arms or legs, swelling is usually most noticeable furthest from the heart (distally) but may involve the whole limb. In some people, swelling may cause sensations of tightness, heaviness, discomfort and unusual tingling (paresthesia) in the affected areas. The affected area heals poorly even after minor trauma (e.g., cut or insect bite). The skin of the affected area may become abnormally dry and scaly (hyperkeratosis) and fibroadipose tissue may form beneath the skin resulting in deep fissures and a “woody” texture. Other skin problems may develop such as bleeding from fluid-filled sacs (vesicles), leakage of lymph fluid from the skin (lymphorrhea), and warty growth (papillomatosis).
Conditions associated with lymphedema that is present at or shortly after birth (< 1 year), most often affect the legs (90%), and in some patients, the genitals may also be affected. The extent and location of edema varies greatly from person to person even among individuals in the same family. Ultrasound scanning during pregnancy may indicate if a fetus is affected if swelling of the tops (dorsum) of the feet is noted in the second or third trimester. Additional clinical features include upslanting, dysplastic toenails, and large or prominent veins below the knees and in males, urethral abnormalities and the development of a fluid-filled sac along the spermatic cord of the scrotum (hydrocele).
Conditions associated with primary lymphedema that develops after one year of age may include swelling that is unilateral, bilateral or involve all four limbs and sometimes the genitalia. Some individuals may present with unilateral swelling, but the opposite, corresponding (contralateral) limb may become involved later (9 to 25% risk) and show abnormalities on an imaging study (radionuclide lymphoscintigraphy) even when edema cannot be observed.
Affected individuals with lymphedema are at risk for developing infections including cellulitis or infection of the lymphatic vessels (lymphangitis). Bacterial infection of the skin and underlying soft tissues (cellulitis) has also been reported in approximately 20% of individuals with primary lymphedema. These infections are characterized by areas of warm, painful and reddened skin. Red skin “streaks” may also develop in the infected area. Increased edema is common. A general feeling of ill health (malaise), fever, chills and/or headaches may also occur. If left untreated, cellulitis can lead to septicemia, skin abscesses, areas of ulceration and/or tissue damage (necrosis). Athlete’s foot (tinea pedis) can cause cracks in the interdigital skin, bacterial invasion, and then cellulitis.
Individuals affected with lymphedema are at a greater risk than the general population for developing a non-melanoma skin cancer at the affected site. These malignancies include angiosarcoma, which are cancerous tumors that develop from blood or lymphatic vessels. A rare type of angiosarcoma is known as lymphangiosarcoma, or Stewart-Treves syndrome (STS). STS has been reported in long-standing cases of primary lymphedema. STS occurs in the lymphedematous extremity but can spread to the adjacent trunk and lungs.

