Primary Hyperparathyroidism

synonyms:
PHPT

overview:
Primary hyperparathyroidism is a condition in which the parathyroid glands produce too much parathyroid hormone and the calcium level in the blood becomes elevated. The parathyroid glands are part of the endocrine system, the network of glands that secrete hormones into the bloodstream where they travel to various areas of the body. Endocrine glands release hormones that regulate the chemical processes (metabolism) that influence the function of various organs and activities within the body. Hormones are involved innumerousvital processes including regulating heart rate, body temperature and blood pressure,as well as cell differentiation and growth,andin modulation of several metabolic processes. There are four tiny parathyroid glands found in the neck. They are about the size of a pea. Parathyroid hormone (along with vitamin D) is the main regulator of the level of calcium in the blood. It also affects the blood phosphorus level, bone growth and bone cell activity. Most individuals with primary hyperparathyroidism do not develop symptoms (asymptomatic) orhaveonly extremely mild symptoms. Primary hyperparathyroidismmainly affectsthe skeleton and the kidneys, but the heart, gastrointestinal, and nervous system can sometimes be involved. About 80-85% of the time, the disorder is caused by a benign tumor called an adenoma that is usually found in one of the four parathyroid glands.

symptoms:
Asymptomatic Primary HyperparathyroidismThe most common presentation of primary hyperparathyroidism is when doctors find high levels of calcium in the blood, but no associated symptoms. This is also called asymptomatic hypercalcemia. Some individuals with asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism report fatigue, weakness, mild depression, or mild cognitive dysfunction such as mild issues with concentration or memory. Whether these are caused by the condition or reversible with surgery is not clear. A recent randomized controlled trial of parathyroidectomy versus observation showed no clear benefit of surgery on depression or quality of life 10 years after treatment. Patients with asymptomatic disease may also have bone loss (low bone mineral density) and silent kidney stones and spine fractures detected by imaging. Eventually, asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism can progress, and individuals may develop symptoms seen in the classic form.
Classic Primary HyperparathyroidismA characteristic finding of primary hyperparathyroidism is the development of calcium stones in the kidneys (nephrolithiasis). This has occurred with less and less frequency in the United States in recent years. Nephrolithiasis can cause low back pain in the area of the kidneys (renal colic) and pain in the lower back and lower abdomen. Sometimes, kidney damage can develop, and the kidneys may function less efficiently than they should (chronic renal insufficiency).
Affected individuals may lose bone mineral density, which can contribute to thinning and weakening of bones (osteoporosis). Affected individuals can be prone to fractures of bones and can experience bone pain.
Primary hyperparathyroidism can cause a form of bone disease called osteitis fibrosa cystica. However, this is rarely seen in the United States (less than 2% of individuals) and other developed countries. Affected individuals are prone to fractures and there may be other skeletal abnormalities and bone pain or tenderness in the affected areas. Osteitis fibrosa cystica occurs in advanced disease.
A variety of nonspecific symptoms have been associated with classical primary hyperparathyroidism. Nonspecific means that the symptoms are common to many different disorders. These symptoms include unintended weight loss, vomiting, nausea, constipation, drinking lots of water (polydipsia), and urinating frequently (polyuria). Some affected individuals experience weakness and fatigue.
Many individuals with primary hyperparathyroidism have reported neuropsychiatric symptoms including depression, irritability, psychosis, and decreased social interaction. There may be cognitive dysfunction, which means there may be problems with concentration or memory, or individuals may experience a lack of mental clarity (“brain fog”).
Sometimes, primary hyperparathyroidism may be associated with cardiovascular disease including high blood pressure (hypertension), irregular heart rhythms (arrhythmias), enlargement and thickening of the left lower chamber of the heart (ventricular hypertrophy) and hardening due to calcium buildup (calcification) of blood vessels and valves of the circulatory system. Generally, cardiovascular disease has been reported in people with severe primary hyperparathyroidism. Much about the relationship between primary hyperparathyroidism and cardiovascular disease is not fully understood (e.g., the underlying cause of cardiovascular problems, their response to treatment, etc.). Research is ongoing to better understand these two conditions and how they interact or influence each other. A large observational study showed an increased risk of death and cardiovascular events in patients with primary hyperparathyroidism and improvement after parathyroidectomy. On the other hand, a recent smaller randomized controlled trial evaluated the effect of randomization to surgery on cardiovascular outcomes and death and found no benefit.
Normocalcemic HyperparathyroidismThis condition is characterized by high parathyroid hormone but normal blood calcium levels. Symptoms associated with this form of primary hyperparathyroidism include kidney stones, bone loss, and fragile bones that may be prone to fracture (osteoporosis). Much about the disorder remains unknown or not completely understood. Some researchers believe the normocalcemic form may be an early or mild form of classic primary hyperparathyroidism.
Parathyroid (Hypercalcemic) CrisisParathyroid crisis is a rare complication of primary hyperparathyroidism. Affected individuals develop severe hypercalcemia that is life-threatening. Symptoms can include changes in mental status, bone disease, dehydration, and kidney stones. Sometimes, nausea, vomiting, and severe abdominal pain may occur. Some individuals with hypercalcemia or mild hyperparathyroidism develop parathyroid crisis later. It may be triggered by an intercurrent illness or dehydration, though sometimes there is not an identifiable precipitant. In other individuals, a parathyroid crisis can be the first sign of the disorder.

