Proctitis

synonyms:
Antibiotic-Induced ProctitisGonorrheal ProctitisHerpetic ProctitisIschemic ProctitisRadiation ProctitisSyphilitic Proctitis

overview:
Proctitis is a chronic inflammatory disease arising in the rectum and characterized by bloody diarrhea.  There are two types of proctitis, ulcerative and gonorrheal, which are differentiated by the means in which they are contracted. Gonorrheal proctitis is transmitted through sexual contact.

symptoms:
Symptoms of proctitis are most frequently pain in the rectal area and a frequent desire to pass feces.  Bloody diarrhea, painful defecation and bleeding in the rectal area are also common.  Diarrhea may be followed by constipation with spasm and severe straining of the rectal muscles (tenesmus).  In some cases, stools may be well formed but surrounded by blood and mucus.
Proctitis usually runs a mild, intermittent course over many years. Occasionally there is neurological involvement with urinary bladder dysfunction, weakness and burning of the lower limbs (paresthesias) and pain in the thighs.  Men may have difficulty maintaining penile erections.  When a diagnosis of gonorrheal proctitis is confirmed, individuals also should be tested for other sexually transmitted organisms such as syphilis, amebiasis, chlamydia, campylobacter, shigella, and herpes simplex virus infections.
Upon examination, individuals with ulcerative proctitis show ulcers in the rectum.  Ulcerations are usually accompanied by rectal bleeding, straining of rectal muscles (tenesmus) and an anal discharge of bloody mucus. However, anal bleeding is seldom severe.  Individuals with diarrhea often describe no increase in stool volume but rather frequent passage of small amounts of mucous or blood.  Fever and weight loss are rare.  Symptoms of ulcerative proctitis are very similar to ulcerative colitis.  However, ulcerative proctitis is not as serious as colitis and is limited to the rectum.  (See related disorder section for more information on Ulcerative Colitis.)

