Progressive Supranuclear Palsy

synonyms:
nuchal dystonia dementia syndromePSPSteele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome

overview:
Summary
Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is an uncommon degenerative neurological disorder that causes progressive impairment of balance and walking; impaired eye movement, especially in the downward direction; abnormal muscle tone (rigidity); speech difficulties (dysarthria); and problems related to swallowing and eating (dysphagia). Affected individuals frequently experience personality changes and cognitive impairment. Symptoms typically begin after age 60 but can begin earlier. The exact cause of PSP is unknown. PSP is often misdiagnosed as Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, corticobasal degeneration and other neurodegenerative disorders.
Introduction
Drs. John C. Steele, J.C. Richardson and J. Olszewski identified progressive supranuclear palsy as a distinct neurological disorder in 1963.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of PSP vary from person to person, but patients generally fall into one of four clinical syndromes (phenotypes): Richardson syndrome, atypical Parkinsonism, corticobasal syndrome, and pure akinesia and gait freezing. Less commonly, patients present with cognitive loss and no motor signs.
The most common presentation is the Richardson syndrome, consisting of gait and balance impairment, a wide-eyed staring facial expression, abnormal speech, memory and cognitive impairment and a slowing or loss of voluntary eye movement, particularly in the downward direction (supranuclear ophthalmoplegia). Cognitive symptoms include forgetfulness and personality changes, such as loss of interest in formerly pleasurable activities (apathy), impaired attention and concentration, depression, and increased irritability.
Fewer than half of all PSP patients are initially diagnosed correctly because many patients do not present with the classic Richardson syndrome. Many of these patients are initially slow and have muscle rigidity and occasionally tremor, resembling Parkinson disease, and they may initially respond somewhat to levodopa. Other patients present with bizarre stiffening (rigidity and dystonia) and loss of voluntary function in one upper limb, as is seen in corticobasal degeneration.
Some patients exhibit a syndrome of progressive gait freezing. These patients exhibit hesitant initiation of gait and a tendency to freeze or stop when turning and when crossing thresholds (doorways). Their eye movements and cognition are normal. Small handwriting and low-volume rapid, mumbling speech (tachyphemia or cluttered speech) are typical and are similar to that which occurs in Parkinson disease, but in contrast to Parkinson disease, there is no slowness (bradykinesia) or muscle stiffness (rigidity). Finally, some patients with PSP present with cognitive impairment and personality change (frontotemporal dementia), progressive speech and language impairment, generalized ataxia, or generalized spasticity. Most patients with these atypical presentations ultimately develop abnormalities of eye movement, speech, swallowing and gait (Richardson syndrome) in a few years. Thus, the diagnosis of PSP typically becomes more certain as the disease progresses.
The challenge is to diagnose the disease in the very early stages, and this is very difficult in patients that do not have the classic Richardson syndrome. There is no diagnostic laboratory or radiologic test for PSP. Therefore, most patients are diagnosed fairly late in the course of the illness. PSP culminates in death at a median of 6 to 9 years after diagnosis, and those with the Richardson syndrome and dementia progress most rapidly. Death from PSP is most often caused by pneumonia or other infections.
Impaired eye movements eventually make reading, driving, and interpersonal eye contact difficult or impossible. Abnormal eyelid control causes the eyes to close involuntarily (blepharospasm) for seconds or more, and some affected individuals may have difficulty opening their eyes after closure (eye opening apraxia), even though the muscles around the eyes appear relaxed. Patients often blink less than normal, causing the eyes to become dry and red.
Muscles of the body may contract involuntarily, causing the affected body part (e.g., the upper or lower limbs) to assume bizarre postures. This is called dystonia. Blepharospasm is a form of dystonia affecting the muscles around the eyes.
A mild or moderate degree of mental impairment eventually occurs in most patients, and this may be misdiagnosed as Alzheimer disease when it occurs early in the illness, before significant difficulties with speech, balance and eye movements appear.
Some patients experience sleep disturbances such as frequent awakenings and changes in sleeping patterns. Sleep disturbances may be a sign of depression or may be a side effect of a medication. REM (rapid eye movement) sleep behavior disorder is not a characteristic of PSP but is a characteristic of dementia with Lewy bodies, Parkinson disease and multiple system atrophy. In REM sleep behavior disorder, patients talk and move during dream sleep, and the movement can result in personal injury or injury to a bed partner.

