Progressive Osseous Heteroplasia

synonyms:
POH

overview:
Summary
Progressive osseous heteroplasia (POH) is an extremely rare disorder characterized by abnormal development of bone in areas of the body where bone is not normally present (heterotopic ossification). The disorder first appears as areas of patchy bone formation (ossification) in the skin during infancy; heterotopic ossification progresses to involve superficial and deep connective tissues, including areas of fat beneath the skin (subcutaneous fat), muscles, tendons, ligaments and the sheets of fibrous tissue that envelop muscle (fascia). This abnormal formation of bone may restrict the movement of affected joints and/or hinder the growth of affected limbs. The course of the disease is unpredictable; some areas of the body may become severely affected while others may remain unaffected. A diagnosis of POH is made only if the bone formation progresses to the deeper connective tissues. Otherwise, bone formation is classified as osteoma cutis.

symptoms:
Progressive osseous heteroplasia (POH)is a rare condition where abnormal bone formation occurs outside the normal skeleton. Signs and symptoms can vary among the affected people. In addition, the progression of POH can vary much from person to person, even within the same family. Some people may experience a slow progression, while others may have a more rapid onset.
In POH, bone formation may occur more within the membranes (intramembranously) than within cartilage (endochondrally) and there is no inflammation. Histologically, bone can be seen to arise directly within adipose stromal tissue although the exact cell(s) of origin remain unknown.
Symptoms often appear at birth or within the first few weeks of life. Babies with POH usually show a rash with patchy areas of bone within the skin’s dermis layer. The affected skin may feel unusually rough to the touch.
Main signs and symptoms may include:
Extra-skeletal bone formation: The key feature of POH is the development of bone outside the usual skeleton, known as heterotopic ossification.
Osseous nodules or plaques are small, hard areas of bone that may form within the skin and are called osteoma cutis.
Over time, these can spread and merge to form larger areas of hardened skin (dermal ossification).
Subcutaneous extension occurs as POH progresses, where these abnormal bone growths can extend deeper into the skin layers and into connective tissues like fascia and skeletal muscles.
Additional symptoms may include:
Bone projections, sharp, needle-like bone projections (spicules) that can break through the skin, potentially causing irritation or superficial infections.
Movement restriction caused by the growth of these abnormal bones that can restrict joint movement and may eventually cause joints to lock (ankylosis). This restriction can occur in any part of the body.
Asymmetrical growth, where POH can cause one side of the body to be more affected than the other, leading to uneven growth. For example, one leg or arm may become shorter than the other.
Scoliosis, an abnormal lateral curvature of the spine if bone growth occurs around the spinal area.
POH is a complex condition with a wide range of symptoms and severity. While there is no cure, understanding these symptoms can help in managing the condition and improving the quality of life for those affected.
In mouse models POH have been shown to alter the bone quality. However, detailed studies of skeletal bone quality in POH remain to be thoroughly investigated.

