Proteus Syndrome

overview:
Summary
Proteus syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by overgrowth of various tissues of the body. The cause of the disorder is a mosaic variant in a gene calledAKT1. Disproportionate, asymmetric overgrowth occurs in a mosaic pattern (i.e., a random “patchy” pattern of affected and unaffected areas). Affected individuals may experience a wide variety of complications that may include progressive skeletal malformations, benign and malignant tumors, malformations of blood vessels (vascular malformations), cystic pulmonary disease and certain skin lesions. In some people, life-threatening conditions relating to abnormal blood clotting may develop including deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.

Introduction
Proteus syndrome was first reported in the medical literature in 1979. Researchers now believe that Joseph Merrick, whose life was the subject of the play and movie The Elephant Man, had Proteus syndrome and not neurofibromatosis, as previously thought.

symptoms:
Proteus syndrome may affect bone and connective tissue, fatty tissues, skin, central nervous system and internal organs (viscera). Bone, connective tissue and fat are the most commonly affected tissues in the body. The specific symptoms and severity vary greatly from person to person. Some individuals may exhibit only a few, mild symptoms of Proteus syndrome, making diagnosis challenging.
Most affected individuals are born without any noticeable symptoms. Some patients can have brain overgrowth at birth. Overgrowth usually begins between 6-18 months.
Overgrowth associated with Proteus syndrome is irregular, disproportionate and may affect one side of the body such as only one foot and not the other (asymmetric). Overgrowth of bone may affect the skull, the long bones of the arms and legs, and the feet and hands. Overgrowth of long bones of the legs can often cause one leg to be longer than the other. The spine may be affected, resulting in an abnormally curved spine (scoliosis). Progressive, bony overgrowth can affect joints in the fingers or larger joints such as the knee limiting movement and range of motion. Ultimately, joints may become significantly overgrown and locked in place (immobilized).
In childhood, affected individuals may develop abnormal skin conditions including localized areas of severe fatty overgrowth especially on the trunk or the arms and legs. In some, benign tumors consisting of fatty tissue (lipomas) may develop. In addition to fatty tissue overgrowth, some affected individuals may develop areas of fatty tissue loss (atrophy) especially in the chest.
Affected children may also develop a raised, rough (verrucous) lesion (epidermal nevus) that is usually rough and dark brown or brownish black. An epidermal nevus may be present at birth. Another skin lesion known as cerebriform connective tissue nevus (CCTN) may occur. This slow-growing lesion is most often found on the feet and less commonly on the hands. It is not present at birth and is made up of thickened, abnormally firm subcutaneous tissue. The skin may develop deep grooves or furrows that look like the surface of a brain.
Malformations of various blood vessels (vascular malformations) are common in Proteus syndrome. Capillaries, veins, and lymph vessels can be affected. The capillaries are tiny blood vessels that connect arteries and veins. Veins are blood vessels that take blood to the heart. Lymph vessels are part of the lymphatic system, the circulatory network of vessels, ducts and nodes that filter and distribute certain protein-rich fluid (lymph) and blood cells throughout the body.
Individuals with Proteus syndrome may be at risk for developing blood clots in the legs, a condition known as deep vein thrombosis (DVT). The legs may become painful and swollen and blood vessels in the legs may be visibly enlarged. In some, a piece of a DVT may break off and travel up the bloodstream to the lungs. This blood clot in the lung, pulmonary embolism, can be life threatening. It can cause breathlessness, sudden pain in the chest, exhaustion or complications such as high blood pressure of the pulmonary artery.
Additional findings can occur in Proteus syndrome including abnormal enlargement of certain internal organs such as the liver, spleen, kidney, and others. Eye abnormalities such as crossed eyes (strabismus) or benign tumors on the white part of the eye (epibulbar dermoid) may be present. Some individuals with Proteus syndrome may develop cystic lung disease that can lead to worsening breathing problems and require surgery.
Affected individuals also have a predisposition of developing a wide variety of tumors, most of which are benign. The tumors most often associated with Proteus syndrome are ovarian and testicular cystadenoma, a rare salivary gland tumor known as monomorphic adenoma and meningioma.
Less common findings in Proteus syndrome include malformations of the central nervous system such as overgrowth of half of the brain (hemimegalencephaly). In some patients, intellectual disability may be present, and seizures have been reported as well. Individuals with these abnormalities may also have distinct facial features including a long face, downward slanting eyelid folds (palpebral fissures), droopy eyelids (ptosis), low bridge of the nose, wide nostrils (nares) and a long narrow head (dolichocephaly). The reason for the association of neurological and facial abnormalities is unknown.

