Protein C Deficiency

synonyms:
Hereditary thrombophilia due to protein C deficiencyPROC deficiency

overview:
Summary

symptoms:
Individuals with the mild form of protein C deficiency are at risk for developing blood clots, particularly in the veins (venous thromboembolisms). They are also at risk for a skin disease following treatment with a blood thinner called warfarin (warfarin-induced skin necrosis). Whether protein C deficiency increases the risk of blood clots in the arteries (arterial thrombosis) is not fully understood.
Infants with the severe forms of protein C deficiency (homozygous or compound heterozygous forms) can develop symptoms within hours to a few days after birth. They develop a potentially life-threatening condition called purpura fulminans. This condition is characterized by the formation of blood clots in blood vessels throughout the body. Blood clots affect the arms and legs most often, but can become widespread throughout the body (disseminated intravascular coagulation). Blood clots can block the normal flow of blood and lead to death (necrosis) of the surrounding tissue. Infants experience abnormal bleeding in affected areas and the formation of large, purple patches or spots on the skin and necrosis of the affected skin. Bruising and discoloration of the skin can be widespread over the body. Episodes of purpura fulminans may recur. Without treatment, purpura fulminans can be fatal.
People with the milder form of protein C deficiency may not show any symptoms (asymptomatic) until they reach adulthood. Others may remain asymptomatic. The most common symptom is deep vein thrombosis. This is a clot that forms in the deep veins of the legs. This can be painful and can cause the leg to swell, but the clots can form without pain or swelling too. A potential complication of this blood clot is that a piece of it can break off, travel through the bloodstream, and become lodged in the lungs. This can block the flow of blood to the lungs, a condition called pulmonary embolism. Blood clots can also form in the blood vessels that drain blood from the large and small intestines (mesenteric veins). Less often, blood clots may form in the cerebral veins, the main vein of the liver (portal vein), and other areas. Episodes of blood clots are often “triggered” or provoked by other risk factors such as surgery, pregnancy or immobilization or inactivity. Blood clots are more likely to develop as people with the milder form protein C deficiency get older.
Individuals with protein C deficiency are at risk of developing a condition called Warfarin-induced skin necrosis. The use of warfarin in affected individuals can lead to widespread skin lesions. The arms and legs, breasts and trunk are the most commonly affected areas. The lesions may be reddish or purple and, without treatment, will worsen until the affected skin breaks down.
Doctors do not know for sure whether people with protein C deficiency have an increased risk of developing blood clots in the arteries. This would increase their risk of having a cardiovascular issue such as a stroke.

