Protein S Deficiency

synonyms:
hereditary thrombophilia due to protein S deficiency

overview:
Protein S deficiency is a rare genetic disorder of blood coagulation that is caused by a variation in thePROS1gene. This variation is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Affected individuals are at an increased risk of developing blood clots in the legs (deep venous thrombosis), which can break off and travel to the lungs, which is termed pulmonary embolism. Affected individuals are deficient in protein S, which is a specialized blood protein. Specifically, protein S is involved in inhibiting coagulation. This means that it helps to prevent the blood from clotting too much. Affected individuals who inherit one abnormal protein S gene are at risk for developing blood clots. Although very rare, there is a severe form that is present at birth (congenital) due to the presence of 2 abnormal protein S genes that can potentially cause widespread small clots in the body and life-threatening complications in infancy. Occasionally protein S deficiency may be acquired as a result of acquired conditions such as kidney disease (i.e., nephrotic syndrome), pregnancy, or the use of oral contraceptives.

symptoms:
Individuals with protein S deficiency are at risk for developing blood clots, specifically blood clots that begin in veins (venous thromboembolisms). Veins are the blood vessels in the body that carry blood to the heart. The exact risk of a blood clot, the age of onset of the disease, the severity of the disease, and the number and frequency and location of blood clots will vary greatly among affected individuals. This is due, in part, to the amount of residual protein S activity there is in the body. Some individuals with protein S deficiency due to inheritance of a single abnormal protein S gene (termed heterozygous) may never develop a blood clot and others may not develop one until adulthood.
The two most common findings associated with protein S deficiency are deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism. Deep vein thrombosis or DVT is a clot that forms in the legs. This can be painful and can cause the leg to swell, but the clots can form without pain or swelling too. A potential complication of this blood clot is that a piece of it can break off, travel through the bloodstream, and become lodged in the lungs. This can block the flow of blood to the lungs, a condition called pulmonary embolism. Blood clots can also form in the blood vessels that drain blood from the large and small intestines (mesenteric veins). Less often, blood clots may form in the cerebral veins or other areas.
Infants with the severe forms of protein S deficiency (homozygous or compound heterozygous forms due to inheritance of abnormal protein S genes from both parents) can develop symptoms within hours to a few days after birth. They develop a potentially life-threatening condition called purpura fulminans. This condition is characterized by the formation of blood clots in blood vessels throughout the body. Blood clots affect the arms and legs most often, but can become widespread throughout the body (disseminated intravascular coagulation). Blood clots can block the normal flow of blood and lead to death (necrosis) of the surrounding tissue. Infants experience abnormal bleeding in affected areas and the formation of large, purple patches or spots on the skin and necrosis of the affected skin. Bruising and discoloration of the skin can be widespread over the body. Episodes of purpura fulminans may recur. Without treatment, purpura fulminans can be fatal.

