PRRT2-Associated Paroxysmal Movement Disorders

overview:
Summary
PRRT2-associated paroxysmal movement disorders are a group of rare movement and seizure disorders caused by changes (disease-causing variants or mutations) in thePRRT2gene. They include a spectrum of specific disorders including paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia (PKD), benign familial infantile epilepsy (BFIE), paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia with infantile convulsions (PKD/IC) and hemiplegic migraine (HM). It’s important to note that these disorders can also have different genetic causes.
PRRT2-associated paroxysmal movement disorders are reported to have variable expressivity and reduced penetrance. Variable expressivity means that there is a range of symptoms that can occur in people affected with this genetic condition. Reduced penetrance is when not all people with a disease-causing genetic change will have symptoms. The average age of onset forPRRT2– paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia is in childhood or adolescence. It is characterized by sudden attacks of involuntary movement that can be either unilateral (one side of the body) and bilateral (both sides of the body). The term kinesigenic means that the movement episodes are triggered by sudden movement or intention to move, while the term paroxysmal means that the abnormal movements come and go over time. Many PKD episodes last less than one minute but patients can have multiple in a day, some as high as 100. BFIE is defined by complex partial seizures or localization-related epilepsy with the onset being in the first year of life with resolution by 2 years old. Patients can experience multiple seizures per day occurring every 2-3 hours on average. PKD/IC is a combination of PKD and BFIE meaning that a patient would experience both seizures and PKD episodes of involuntary movement. Hemiplegic migraines are a specific type of migraine with aura, where the migraines are associated with temporary (transient) motor weakness or temporary paralysis of half of body (hemiparesis).

Introduction
PRRT2-associated paroxysmal movement disorders include a wide and evolving spectrum of paroxysmal diseases.
ThePRRT2gene encodes a protein that is involved in releasing neurotransmitters. Neurotransmitters are chemicals that carry messages (chemical signals) from one nerve cell to the target cell (which can be another nerve cell or muscle cell). Healthy neurotransmitters are constantly going between cells to carry messages and instructions. Improper functioning of neurotransmitters can cause dysregulation of the signals in a person’s central nervous system (brain and spinal cord). When nerve cells are not getting the proper signals, it can lead to the medical problems associated withPRRT2-associated paroxysmal movement disorders.

symptoms:
paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia (PKD)The primary movement disorder associated with PRRT2 is paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia (PKD). This is the most common type of paroxysmal dyskinesia. PKD attacks often occur in childhood and are thought to be induced by sudden movements, which can include being startled, going from walking to running, stress, or rapid, deep breathing (hyperventilation). Around 10% of people report having a warning sign of numbness or paresthesia in the limbs or face prior to the attack. It is often described as a crawling sensation in the affected areas. The attacks are characterized by abnormal muscle contraction (dystonia) and episodes of unwanted, uncontrollable movements, often of the muscles in the arms, legs, face and body (choreoathetosis). Additionally, patients can sometimes have irregular, frequently violent movements of the shoulder and arm while awake (ballism). Most attacks are brief, lasting only a few seconds to a minute, but some have been reported to last for as long as five minutes. There is significant variability in the frequency of attacks ranging from one per week to 100 per day. The average age of onset for PKD is 10 years old but can range from 1-20 years old, with attacks becoming less frequent with age. Common triggers for episodes are stress, sleep deprivation, fevers, and anxiety. Avoiding these in conjunction with specific medications can help reduce the number of episodes a patient experiences.
hemiplegic migraineHemiplegic migraines are a rare type of migraine headache with sensory symptoms called aura that can include flashes of light, blind spots, or tingling. This can cause temporary paralysis on one side of the body. They are often accompanied by other neurological symptoms such as visual disturbances, confusion and difficulty speaking. Common triggers for hemiplegic migraines are stress, anxiety, heat or light. The age of onset for hemiplegic migraines can be as early as late childhood but are more commonly seen during puberty or early adulthood. It also has a range of frequency with some reporting as many as a few per week to only one per month. The duration of the migraine attacks also varies greatly from only fifteen minutes to three days. Individuals report that the frequency of migraines decreases over time with many claiming complete remission during adulthood. It has also been documented that there is improvement of hemiplegic migraines during pregnancy.
benign infantile epilepsyBenign familial infantile seizures (BFIS) are a rare form of epilepsy that typically begin during the first twelve months of life in otherwise healthy children. This condition is characterized by sudden jerking movements, eye deviation, or staring spells and are often triggered by excitement or fever. These seizures are characterized as self-limiting, meaning they stop on their own without intervention and are not known to cause any long-term neurological damage. Because of this, treatment is not typically required. Many times, the seizures diminish greatly or completely resolve by early childhood.
Less Common Signs and Symptoms
episodic ataxiaEpisodic ataxia is a neurological disorder characterized by recurrent episodes of unsteadiness and lack of coordination that vary in duration. Additional symptoms that can be seen are progressive, weakness between episodes (inter-attack weakness), dystonia and unbalanced walking (ataxia). Often these symptoms are due to differences in the cerebellum, the part of the brain that controls balance for walking and standing. Triggers that have been well documented for episodes of ataxia include stress, caffeine, hormonal changes and fatigue. The mechanism that causes the episodes is unknown. It has been noted that symptoms sometimes go away on their own or the severity lessens.
paroxysmal torticollisParoxysmal torticollis is a rare condition in which there are recurrent episodes of head tilting associated with irritability, vomiting, hypotonia, malaise (discomfort) and/or pallor (pale appearance). Onset begins in infancy and typically resolves between two to five years of age with the frequency being two to three times a month, but lessens as the child ages. The episodes typically last around ten minutes, but they have been reported to last as long as two months. It has been proposed that an episode is a precursor for migraines in older children. There is currently no specific treatment for this condition. Many families have used over-the-counter pain and nausea medication to aid in treating with varying degrees of success.
familial paroxysmal non-kinesigenic dyskinesiaFamilial paroxysmal non-kinesigenic dyskinesia is a condition where there are unilateral or bilateral involuntary movements. Typically, episodes are triggered by alcohol, tea, coffee, excitement, stress, fatigue, or can be spontaneous. The onset of these episodes is typically in early childhood or early teens but can be as late as 50 years old. They can range from minutes to hours, but rarely occur more than once a day.

