Prune Belly Syndrome

synonyms:
Abdominal Muscle Deficiency SyndromeCongenital Absence of the Abdominal MusclesDeficiency of abdominal musculatureEagle-Barrett SyndromeObrinsky SyndromeTriad syndrome

overview:
Prune-Belly syndrome, also known as Eagle-Barrett syndrome, is a rare disorder characterized by partial or complete absence of the stomach (abdominal) muscles, failure of both testes to descend into the scrotum (bilateral cryptorchidism), and/or urinary tract malformations. The urinary malformations may include abnormal widening (dilation) of the tubes that bring urine to the bladder (ureters), accumulation of urine in the ureters (hydroureter) and the kidneys (hydronephrosis), and/or backflow of urine from the bladder into the ureters (vesicoureteral reflux). Complications associated with Prune-Belly syndrome may include underdevelopment of the lungs (pulmonary hypoplasia) and/or chronic renal failure. The exact cause of Prune-Belly syndrome is not known.

symptoms:
Prune Belly syndrome is characterized by partial absence of some or most abdominal muscles giving rise to a wrinkled or prune-like appearance.  Often, the attachments of the muscles to the bones are present, but the muscles diminish in size and thickness over the bladder.  The abdomen appears large and lax, the abdominal wall is thin and the intestinal loops can be seen through the thin abdominal wall.  Skin folds may radiate from the navel or occur as transverse folds across the abdomen.  A midline crease from the navel to pubic area may be present in some cases.  The navel may appear as a vertical slit, or as a linear central scar, but it can also appear normal.  Sometimes the navel is connected with the bladder through a canal (urachus) or a cyst.  The chest is often deformed.  Flaring of the rib margins or a horizontal depression under the chest (Harrison groove) can appear in many children born with Prune Belly Syndrome.  Narrowing of the chest in the transverse direction (pigeon breast) may also occur.
Enlargement of the bladder is present in almost all cases.  Obstruction of the neck of the bladder is the primary problem, resulting in bladder distention and urine retention.  The connection between the kidney and bladder (ureter) may be abnormal; the opening between ureter and bladder may be narrowed or closed.  Obstruction may also occur at the junction of the ureter and kidney.  Usually, the ureters are greatly widened.  Occasionally this enlargement occurs only on one side or decreases as the ureter nears the bladder.  Distention of the kidney with urine (hydronephrosis), on one or both sides, may also occur.  In some cases, hydronephrosis occurs on one side while the kidney is underdeveloped on the other side.  Kidney cysts may also be present.  The canal that carries urine from the bladder to the outside of the body (urethra) usually is unobstructed.  In males, absence of an opening (atresia) in the urethra, folds acting as valves below the entrance of the semen and prostate ducts (verumontanum), compression by a pouch and overdevelopment of the prostatic urethra also have been noted in some cases.
Musculoskeletal abnormalities, especially club foot, are present in about 20% of cases, while cardiovascular abnormalities are seen in about 10% of cases.
Blood and pus in the urine (hematuria and pyuria) often signal infection. Undescended testes (cryptorchidism) and testes that may be attached to a ureter, often occur in males with Prune Belly syndrome.  Abnormal fixation of the gastrointestinal tract and failure to rotate during fetal development (malrotation) have also been described in the medical literature.

