Prurigo Nodularis

synonyms:
prurigo nodularis of Hydenodular prurigoPicker's nodulesatypical nodular form of neurodermatitis circumscriptalichen corneus obtususPN

overview:
Summary
Prurigo nodularis (PN) is a chronic inflammatory skin disease where an extremely itchy, symmetrically distributed rash appears most commonly on the arms, legs, the upper back and/or the abdomen. The itch associated with PN is so severe that it often interferes with sleep and psychological wellbeing. PN can appear on its own or be associated with other skin diseases or underlying medical conditions that affect multiple body systems, such as cancer, diabetes, chronic kidney disease or AIDS. The exact cause of PN is unknown, but altered function of the immune system and nerves in the skin is believed to be associated with heightened sensations of itchiness (pruritus) that leads to frequent scratching. Frequent scratching and picking of the skin is also thought to contribute to further lesion thickening and formation seen in the disease. PN can occur at any age but is more common in the elderly. When PN occurs in younger patients, it is more likely to be associated with inflammatory skin diseases, usually eczema (also called atopic dermatitis). Diagnosis is usually made by a dermatologist based on clinical symptoms and response to medications, but microscopic examination of a skin biopsy can aid in confirming the diagnosis. Although no FDA-approved treatments for PN currently exist, treatments used for other skin disorders ranging from topical creams to medications that alter the immune response are sometimes prescribed for patients with PN.

symptoms:
The rash associated with prurigo nodularis varies in appearance from patient to patient and is thought to occur from excessive, chronic scratching and picking due to sensations of intense itchiness (pruritus), burning and stinging. Pruritus associated with PN is usually severe; occurs in episodes but can be continuous; and is chronic, lasting longer than 6 weeks. It is typically worsened by sweat, heat, clothing, and stress.
The rash can range in severity from just a few to several hundred lesions and lesions can range in size from a half centimeter to 2 centimeters wide. Lesions are usually symmetrical in distribution and can appear as firm, dome-shaped papules, nodules or plaques. Papules, nodules and plaques vary by width and depth in the skin layers. A papule is less than 1 cm in diameter and elevated above the skin surface; nodules are greater than 1 cm in diameter, extend into the dermis (skin layer beneath the top layer of the skin, the epidermis) and can be above, below, or level with the skin surface; plaques are elevated lesions greater than 1 cm in diameter and are broader than they are deep.
Skin areas affected by PN become thickened (hyperkeratotic) as the protein keratin that makes up skin becomes overly abundant, similar to what happens with the formation of corns and calluses and dry and leathery (lichenified) as is seen in other skin conditions such as eczema where skin is repeatedly scratched. Lesions can be flesh-colored, pink, red, brown or black. Complications can occur if lesions become infected by bacteria. Healed lesions may leave scars and discolored marks.
Lesions are most commonly found on the back of the scalp, trunk of the body (abdomen and upper and lower back) and on the arms and legs. The central back is usually lesion-free, presumably because this area cannot be easily scratched to contribute to lesion formation.
Symptoms of PN require medical treatment and lesions rarely disappear spontaneously without treatment.

