Pseudomyxoma Peritonei

synonyms:
low grade appendiceal mucinous neoplasm (LAMN)colloid carcinomadisseminated peritoneal adenomucinosis (DPAM)malignant appendiceal tumormalignant large bowel cystadenocarcinomamalignant large bowel peritoneal carcinomatosismalignant large bowel tumormucinous cyst adenocarcinomamucinous cystadenomaperitoneal carcinomatosisperitoneal mucinous carcinomatosis (PMCA)PMPpseudomyxoma ovarii

overview:
Pseudomyxoma peritonei is a rare malignant growth characterized by the progressive accumulation of mucus-secreting (mucinous) tumor cells within the abdomen and pelvis. The disorder develops after a small growth (polyp) located within the appendix bursts through the wall of the appendix, and spreads mucus-producing tumor cells throughout the surrounding surfaces (e.g., the membrane that lines the abdominal cavity [peritoneum]). As mucinous tumor cells accumulate, the abdominal area becomes swollen and digestive (gastrointestinal) function becomes impaired. Pseudomyxoma peritonei develops at a variable rate, but may grow at a slower rate (indolent) than other malignancies within the abdomen.

symptoms:
The most common symptoms in individuals with pseudomyxoma peritonei occur due to progressively increasing mucinous tumor within the abdomen and pelvis. Usually, the most common symptom is increasing abdominal size (so called “jelly belly”) and abdominal discomfort from pressure. Although the abdomen may be swollen, it is generally not painful to touch (palpation). In affected males, the second most common finding is protrusion of parts of the intestines through an abnormal opening in the muscular wall of the abdomen near the groin (inguinal hernia). In affected females, the second most common finding is usually an abnormally enlarged ovary. The mucinous tumor seems to grow rapidly within ovarian tissue.
The mucinous tumor accumulates within the fatty membrane in front of the intestines (greater omentum), beneath the muscle that separates the chest from the abdomen (diaphragm), and within the pelvis. In most cases, the small bowel is unaffected. Frequently, the primary tumor that ruptured the appendix may be small in comparison to the extensive mucinous tumor that develops within the abdomen and pelvis. Without appropriate treatment intervention, this disorder will result in obstruction of the intestines or the loss of intestinal function. Progressive mucinous tumor accumulation can result in poor food intake, malnutrition, and, eventually, life-threatening complications.

