Pseudoachondroplasia

synonyms:
PSACH

overview:
Summary

Pseudoachondroplasia (PSACH) is a short-limbed dwarfing condition characterized by disproportionate short stature, normal facial features and head size, and early onset osteoarthritis; intelligence is normal. There is marked laxity in the fingers, wrists, elbows and knees. Joint pain is common at all ages; osteoarthritis occurs in early adulthood and affects all the joints. Scoliosis or abnormal curvature of the spine and cervical spine instability are complications. Pseudoachondroplasia is caused by a change (mutation) in the cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP) gene and is transmitted in an autosomal dominant pattern. Thirty percent of cases are familial with an affected parent transmitting the condition, while 70% occur as a random, new (de novo) mutation inCOMPwith no previous family history.

Introduction

Pseudoachondroplasia was first described in 1959 by Drs. Maroteaux and Lamy and was originally considered to be a type of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia.  It is now classified as aCOMPopathy in the category of multiple epiphyseal dysplasia. While four different forms were previously reported based on severity and inheritance pattern in case reports, pseudoachondroplasia is now known to be a single, distinct disorder caused by mutations in theCOMPgene.

symptoms:
Pseudoachondroplasia shows variable expression with the severity varying within and between families. Infants with pseudoachondroplasia have normal birth parameters and cannot be distinguished from unaffected newborns. Generally, the first sign is diminished linear growth starting between 9 to 12 months first affecting length and eventually height, falling approximately two years behind the standard growth curve. Disproportionate short stature becomes more apparent with age. Affected children usually begin to walk between 12-18 months but gait is abnormal and described as ‘waddling’ reflecting underlying skeletal abnormalities involving the hips. The face has been described as angular. Disproportionate shortening of the arms and legs becomes apparent between 3-5 years of age. The hands and toes are very short, have redundant skin folds and marked joint laxity. Interestingly in contrast, the elbow may have limited extension. Joint laxity at the knees contributes to the lower extremity deformities that range from bowing (genu varum), knock knee (genu valgum) deformities or bowing in one leg and a knock knee deformity in the other called a windswept deformity. Surgical correction is generally required but should be delayed to get maximum sustainable correction.
Spinal abnormalities are common and include: 1) scoliosis or S-shaped spinal curve 2) exaggerated lumbar lordosis, which is an abnormal inward curvature of the lower portion of the spine and 3) kyphosis, which is abnormal front-to-back (or outward) curvature of the spine so that the spine is abnormally rounded at the top. Underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the small, tooth-like projection (odontoid) at the top of the spine can occur. Odontoid hypoplasia causes instability in the neck region (cervical instability), which increases the risk of spinal injury (cervical myelopathy). This complication requires surgical fusion of the upper spine.
Pain, a common and universal complaint, starts in early childhood and is exacerbated by exercise. Activities that stress the joints should be avoided including all contact sports and the trampoline.  Early joint pain may reflect an inflammatory process related to the underlying chondrocyte pathology. Osteoarthritis in early adulthood is a universal finding usually developing into chronic joint pain (arthralgia) specifically affecting the hips, ankles, shoulder, elbows and wrists. Degenerative joint disease is progressive and ultimately may require surgery starting with hip replacement followed by other joint replacements. Symptomatic treatment with anti-inflammatory medications is used for pain management with varying degrees of success.
Final adult height on average is 3’8” (116 cm) for women and 3’9” for men (120 cm) but this can vary as some individuals may attain a height of 4’10”. Intelligence and life expectancy are unaffected and most individuals raise families and lead productive, active and full lives.

