Pseudohypoparathyroidism

overview:
Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) is a hereditary disorder characterized by an inadequate response to the parathyroid hormone, although the hormone is present in normal amounts. Parathyroid hormone controls the amounts of calcium, phosphorus and vitamin D in bones and blood. This impacts bone growth and may cause facial and skeletal deformities. Affected individuals may have short stature, a round face and unusually short fourth fingers. They may also experience headaches, unusual sensations, weakness, fatigue, lack of energy, blurred vision, abnormal sensitivity (hypersensitivity) to light, body pains and weakness, muscle twitches and spasms, and intellectual disabilities. There are multiple subtypes of PHP, which are caused by harmful changes (variants) in certain genes, one of which isGNAS1. These subtypes show some variation in symptoms, and other hormones may also be affected (growth hormone, thyroid hormone, etc.). The symptoms of pseudohypoparathyroidism are usually first noticed in childhood. Possible treatments include calcium supplements, vitamin D supplements, low phosphate diets and growth hormone therapy. People with pseudohypoparathyroidism can lead a normal life.

symptoms:
There are two types of PHP, type 1 and type 2. Type 1 is broken into subtypes 1a, 1b, and 1c. Pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP) is a limited form of PHP-1a, where an individual has the physical symptoms but not the hormone problems. Type 1a, type 1b, and PPHP are the most common subtypes. Both type 1 and type 2 PHP are characterized by resistance to parathyroid hormone, resulting in elevated phosphate levels and low calcium levels in the blood. The low calcium levels in the blood seen in all types of PHP may lead to childhood seizures in some individuals. Involuntary sudden movements, such as seen with paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia (PKD), have also been reported in affected individuals. Beyond these shared characteristics, type 1 and type 2 differ greatly. Additional symptoms of type 1 are well-characterized while little is known about type 2.
PHP type 1 results in resistance to additional endocrine hormones, including thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), gonadotropins (LH and FSH) and growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH). Resistance to these hormones results in obesity as well as delayed or incomplete development during puberty. In females, this can lead to reduced fertility, menstrual disorders or irregularities and altered levels of LH and FSH. In males, this can lead to failure of the testes to descend (cryptorchidism) and elevated LH and FSH levels.
Type 1 is additionally characterized by skeletal abnormalities such as short stature, a round face, short neck and shortened bones in the hands and feet. These abnormalities are collectively referred to as Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO) and vary in severity depending on the type of PHP. People with type 2 lack these physical abnormalities altogether while type 1b has only mild physical abnormalities. In some individuals with type 1, bone formation occurs in soft and connective tissue where bone does not normally exist (heterotopic ossification). This ossification can present as small, raised lesions.
In both type 1 and type 2, affected individuals show variable degrees of intellectual disability and developmental delay. Headaches, weakness, tiring easily, lethargy, spinal cord compression, cataracts and blurred vision or hypersensitivity to light may also be present. Teeth tend to erupt later than normal, and enamel is underdeveloped. Affected individuals may also have crooked teeth and a poor bite.

