Pseudo Hurler Polydystrophy

synonyms:
ML IIIAML III alpha/betamucolipidosis IIIAmucolipidosis III alpha/beta

overview:
Pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy (mucolipidosis type III) is a rare genetic metabolic disorder characterized by a defective enzyme known as UPD-N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphotransferase. This defective enzyme ultimately results in the accumulation of certain complex carbohydrates (mucopolysaccharides) and fatty substances (mucolipids) in various tissues of the body. The symptoms of this disorder are similar, but less severe than those of I-cell disease (mucolipidosis type II) and may include progressive joint stiffness, curvature of the spine (scoliosis), and/or skeletal deformities of the hands (e.g., claw-hands). Growth delays accompanied by deterioration of the hip joints typically develop in children with pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy. Additional symptoms may include clouding of the corneas of the eyes, mild to moderate coarseness of facial features, mild intellectual disability, easy fatigability, and/or heart disease. Pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.
This disorder belongs to a group of diseases known as lysosomal storage disorders. Lysosomes are particles bound in membranes within cells that break down certain fats and carbohydrates. Defective lysosomal enzymes associated with pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy leads to the accumulation of certain fatty substances (mucolipids) and certain complex carbohydrates (mucopolysaccharides) within the cells of many tissues of the body.

symptoms:
In most cases, children with pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy do not exhibit symptoms until 2-4 years of age. Specific symptoms and rate of progression may vary from case to case although the disorder is often slowly progressive.
Initial symptoms may include stiffness of the hands and shoulders. In some cases, claw-like deformities of the hands may occur. These symptoms may progress to cause difficulty with specific tasks (e.g., getting dressed). Eventually, carpal tunnel syndrome may develop. Carpal tunnel syndrome is a neurological disorder characterized by compression of the median nerve, which passes through the carpal tunnel inside the wrist (peripheral nerve entrapment). Symptoms of this disorder affect the hand and wrist and may include pain, numbness, loss of feeling in the fingertips, and/or unusual sensation such as burning or “pins and needles.”
Additional symptoms associated with pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy may include side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis), degeneration of the hip, joints that are permanently fixed in a bent or flexed position (contractures), and short stature. Progressive degeneration of the hip and joint contractures may cause difficulty walking or force affected individuals to walk with a characteristic waddling gait.
Affected children may also develop coarse facial features, clouding (opacity) of the surface of the eye (cornea), abnormalities affecting the nerve-rich membrane (retina) lining the eyes (mild retinopathy), and irregular curvature of the cornea (hyperopic astigmatism).
Although many children with pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy have normal intelligence, some may develop mild intellectual disability or learning disabilities. In some cases, affected children develop aortic insufficiency, a cardiovascular condition in which the aortic valve weakens preventing the valve from shutting and allowing backflow of blood from the major artery of the body (aorta) into one of the chambers of the heart (left ventricle). Symptoms of aortic insufficiency may include palpitations, fatigue, shortness of breath, and chest pain.

