Psittacosis

synonyms:
ornithosisparrot fever

overview:
Psittacosis is an uncommon infectious disease that is most often transmitted to humans through exposure to infected birds, especially parrots, cockatiels, parakeets and similar pet birds. Psittacosis can affect the lungs and may cause inflammatory illness of the lungs (pneumonia). Additional common symptoms include fever, muscle pain (myalgia), headaches, and a dry cough.
Psittacosis is caused by infection with the bacterium, Chlamydia psittaci, and may also be known as ornithosis. It is rare among humans. People who own birds as pets are most likely to be affected by psittacosis. In addition, psittacosis may affect people who work in environments with birds that may be carriers of the infection such as pet store workers, farmers, veterinarians and ranchers.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of psittacosis can vary greatly. Some individuals may not develop any symptoms (asymptomatic) or only have a very mild infection; others can develop serious widespread infection that affects several organ systems of the body. The incubation period, which is the time between exposure to the bacterium to symptom development, is anywhere from five to 15 days. The onset of symptoms may be abrupt or gradual (insidious). The associated symptoms tend to be nonspecific and common to many different conditions.
Affected individuals may develop fever, chills, muscle pain (myalgia), headaches, and a general feeling of poor health (malaise). Pneumonia commonly occurs and, in some cases, can be severe. Breathing (respiratory) abnormalities may develop including a dry, nonproductive cough, difficulty breathing (dyspnea), a sore throat, and, in rare cases, chest pain. Frequent nosebleeds (epistaxis) and abnormal enlargement of the liver and spleen (hepatomegaly) are also common findings.
Although the lungs is the organ most often affected by psittacosis, the disease can potentially affect many organ systems in the body including the gastrointestinal tract, heart, liver, skin and central nervous system. Associated symptoms may include nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, an abnormally slow heart rate (bradycardia), inflammation of the thin membrane (pericardium) that surrounds the heart (pericarditis), inflammation of the thin membrane (endocardium) lining the inside of the heart (endocarditis), inflammation of the liver (hepatitis) causing yellowing of the skin and eyes (jaundice), a rash on the face, severe headaches and a sensitivity to light (photophobia).

