PTEN Hamartoma Tumor Syndrome

synonyms:
PHTS

overview:
The PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome (PHTS) is a spectrum of disorders caused by changes (variants or mutations) of thePTENtumor suppressor gene in egg or sperm cells (germline). These disorders are characterized by multiple hamartomas that can affect various areas of the body. Hamartoma is a general term for a benign tumor-like malformation composed of mature cells and tissue normally found in the affected area that have grown in a disorganized manner. Individuals with a variety of clinical diagnoses who ultimately have been found to carry a germlinePTENvariant as the underlying cause are said to have PHTS.
Cowden syndrome (CS) is the first disorder known to be associated with germlinePTENvariant. When the strictest diagnostic criteria are used, patients with a personal and family history of CS features have up to an 85% chance to have aPTENvariant. Patients with Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS) and with features reminiscent of, but not meeting, diagnostic criteria for Proteus syndrome (called Proteus-like syndrome) have also been found to have an underlying PHTS diagnosis. While these conditions were once thought to be separate, today patients with features of CS or BRRS and an underlyingPTENvariant are unified as all having PHTS, with CS being a diagnosis traditionally given to adults and BRRS being first described in the pediatrics literature. This makes sense given that many of the characteristics first associated with CS tend to not appear until adulthood. PHTS is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means that each child of an affected person has a 50% chance to inherit the disease-causing variant. The symptoms vary greatly from patient to patient, even among individuals in the same family.

symptoms:
The primary findings in PHTS include increased risk for certain types of cancer, benign tumors and tumor-like malformations (hamartomas) and neurodevelopmental disorders. The symptoms of PHTS vary greatly from person to person and can develop at any age.

Cancer in PHTS
Previous data, which focused only on patients with a clinical diagnosis of Cowden syndrome without understanding whether an underlyingPTENvariant was present, estimated lifetime breast cancer risk to be 25-50% and risk for non-medullary thyroid cancer to be 10%. Risks for uterine (endometrial) and kidney (renal cell) cancer were thought to be increased, but an exact risk level was undetermined.
Current data focusing on patients known to have PHTS provide the following lifetime risk estimates, with most diagnoses occurring after age 30:
CancerLifetime Risk with PHTS (%)Average Age at presentationBreast9140sThyroid3330s-40s*Renal Cell3050sEndometrial4840s-50sColon1740sMelanoma540s
*Earliest age for thyroid cancer in PHTS is as early as 7 years old.
Benign tumors in PHTS
Benign skin or oral lesions are very common and tend to appear in early adulthood. The most common types of benign skin lesions seen in PHTS include:·Lipomas – benign fatty tumors which can appear just under the skin or elsewhere (breast area, GI tract)·Acral keratosis – rough patches of skin most often seen on the extremities (arms, hands, legs, feet)·Papillomatous skin papules – wart-like lesions which can appear anywhere, with feet and hands commonly being affected·Mucosal papillomas – Benign overgrowth of tissue affecting the tongue, gums, or inside the nose·Trichilemmomas – Benign tumor of the hair follicle·Fibromas – another kind of overgrowth involving the skin and other connective tissue; may also affect tissue covering organs, such as the ovaries
Gastrointestinal polyps are very common in adults with PHTS. Among patients who had undergone colonoscopy as part of their clinical care, >90% were found to have polyps with a mix of histological subtypes. The most common types of polyps found are hyperplastic or hamartomatous, which rarely develop into malignancy. However, adenomas, which may develop into a cancer, were also identified. Many polyps were very small and did not cause noticeable symptoms such as pain or rectal bleeding. Supported by this evidence, colorectal surveillance should be offered to people who carry aPTENvariant.
Benign breast, thyroid, and uterine lesions are also common in people with PHTS. Some females have severe breast fibrocystic disease or changes which lead to multiple breast biopsies and complications with imaging. Multinodular goiter and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis may develop in children and adults. Uterine fibroids may appear and cause bleeding or discomfort to the extent that a hysterectomy is indicated without an underlying cancer diagnosis.
Vascular tumors, including hemangiomas, arteriovenous malformations, and developmental venous anomalies, have also been observed in patients with PHTS. Treatment of some lesions has been complicated by the tendency for regrowth and scarring.
A small percentage of adults develop a rare tumor known as a cerebellar dysplastic gangliocytoma (Lhermitte-Duclos disease). Symptoms of Lhermitte-Duclos disease include increased intracranial pressure, impaired ability to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia) and seizures. It is rare when a person with adult-onset Lhermitte-Duclos does not have an underlyingPTENvariant, and observing this tumor type is an automatic indicator forPTENgenetic testing.

Neurodevelopmental concerns in PHTS
Macrocephaly (large head size) is found in 94% of measured patients with PHTS and can be a helpful screening tool to identify patients forPTENgenetic testing. In most patients, large head size is caused by overgrowth of brain tissue. The head shape may also be longer than average relative to width in some individuals (dolicocephaly).
Autism and other developmental disorders, such as intellectual disability and developmental delays, have been observed in patients with PHTS. In previous case series, up to 17% of children presenting with macrocephaly and an autism spectrum disorder alone were found to have an underlyingPTENvariant.

