Pulmonary Alveolar Proteinosis

synonyms:
PAPpulmonary alveolar lipoproteinosisphospholipidosis

overview:
The lung is composed of millions of tiny air sacs (alveoli) with very thin walls that allow oxygen in the air we breathe to pass through into the blood. Surfactant is an oily substance comprising phospholipids, lesser amounts of cholesterol and proteins and is made in alveoli. It is present as a thin layer on the surface of alveolar walls and helps them stay open allowing air to come in and out as we breathe. Once used, surfactant is removed (cleared) from alveoli by cells called alveolar macrophages. This helps prevent surfactant from building up too much. Alveolar macrophages require a signaling or ‘messenger’ molecule called granulocyte/macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) to stimulate alveolar macrophages to function properly and maintain a normal surfactant level in alveoli. This process, called surfactant homeostasis, requires GM-CSF to stimulate alveolar macrophages to remove excess surfactant normally.
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP) is a syndrome, a set of symptoms and signs – not a single disease, in which surfactant in alveoli builds up slowly. This blocks air from entering alveoli and oxygen from passing through into the blood, which results in a feeling of breathlessness (dyspnea). Research has greatly improved our understanding of the diseases that cause PAP and how to diagnose and treat them. Diseases that cause PAP can occur in men, women and children of all ages, ethnic backgrounds, and geographic locations. Disease severity varies from mild to severe and depends on which disease is present. Thus, it is important to know which disease is causing PAP in order to determine the best therapy and expected treatment response. Diseases that cause PAP can be grouped into three categories: primary PAP, secondary PAP and congenital PAP (more accurately called disorders of surfactant production).

symptoms:
In autoimmune PAP, a feeling of breathlessness (dyspnea) is the most common symptom. Most patients develop dyspnea very slowly over time typically noticing it only with activity at first and eventually also at rest. As the disease gets worse from the buildup of surfactant, the fingertips can become bluish in color (cyanosis) due to a low level of oxygen in the blood. Cough is the next most common symptom. This can be a dry cough or a productive cough that produces whitish phlegm (sputum). Coughing up phlegm with streaks of blood (hemoptysis), with or without fever, usually indicates that infection is also present. Rounding of the fingernails and swelling of the fingertips (clubbing) is not a sign of autoimmune PAP. Fatigue, weight loss, chest pain or a general feeling of ill health (malaise) can also occur. Less commonly, secondary infections can occur in or outside the lungs. The disease activity over time (natural history) varies among patients with some experiencing life-threatening respiratory failure while others having a ‘smoldering’ or slowly progressing course and others (about 5-7 percent) may undergo spontaneous improvement. At any given time, about thirty percent of patients may not have any symptoms and the disease is discovered accidentally (incidental).
Hereditary PAP is caused by harmful gene variants (mutations) that disrupt the structure of GM-CSF receptors (proteins) on alveolar macrophages, which normally bind GM-CSF and function in an ‘ignition switch’ and ‘car key’ allowing GM-CSF to stimulate these cells. The gene mutations prevent GM-CSF receptors from functioning normally and thus block the effects of GM-CSF on surfactant removal by alveolar macrophages. The clinical presentation of hereditary PAP is similar to that of autoimmune PAP except that it usually develops in children between the ages of 1 and 10 years of age but occasionally occurs in adolescents and older adults. The natural history is also similar to that of autoimmune PAP except that spontaneous improvement has not been reported.
In secondary PAP, the presentation is similar to that of primary PAP but occurs in individuals with another underlying disease (or toxic exposure) known to cause PAP. The natural history typically follows the clinical course of the underlying disease.
In congenital PAP, the clinical presentation depends on which genetic mutation is present. It can vary from respiratory failure at birth to slow development of lung scaring (fibrosis) in children, adolescents or adults. Symptoms can include rapid breathing (tachypnea), difficulty gaining weight and fever. Fever is usually an indication that infection is present. The natural history may involve worsening of disease over time and progression to respiratory failure at various ages, depending on the specific gene involved and which mutations are present.

