Pyoderma Gangrenosum

synonyms:
PG

overview:
Pyoderma gangrenosum (PG) is an inflammatory skin disorder that is characterized by small, red bumps (papules or nodules) or pustules that eventually erode to form swollen open sores (ulcerations). The size and depth of the ulcerations vary greatly, and they are often extremely painful. In approximately 50 percent of cases, PG occurs secondary to another disorder such as inflammatory bowel disease. The exact cause of PG is unknown (idiopathic). Some researchers believe it may be an autoimmune disorder.

symptoms:
Pyoderma gangrenosum often begins as small, quick-spreading reddish- or purple-colored bumps or pustules. These small growths eventually develop into swollen, open sores (ulcerations) with a well-defined blue or violet-colored border. The size and depth of ulcerations vary. Ulcerations may spread, widen and deepen and may become extremely painful. In individual cases, ulcerations may continue to spread, remain unchanged, or heal without treatment.
Ulcerations can affect any part of the body and have been classified into four variants: classic, atypical/bullous, pustular and vegetative.
Classic pyoderma gangrenosum most often occurs on the legs and is characterized by deep ulcerations. These lesions often begin as small pus-filled bumps (pustules) that enlarge and spread rapidly. This form of the disease is often very painful and may also affect the trunk, penis, head and neck areas.
Classic PG also occurs near surgical openings (stoma sites) in the body. This condition is referred to as peristomal pyoderma gangrenosum.
Atypical or bullous pyoderma gangrenosum is characterized by superficial blisters (bullae). This form of the disease most often affects the hands and is often associated with an underlying disorder, especially hematological malignancy such as leukemia. Some cases that have been called atypical pyoderma gangrenosum actually represent Sweet syndrome.
Classic pyoderma gangrenosum is often characterized by the presence of pus and can begin with pustules. Pustular pyoderma gangrenosum is characterized by painful bumps (pustules) most often found on the arms and legs. These lesions eventually develop into ulcerations. This form is often associated with inflammatory bowel disease.
Vegetative pyoderma gangrenosum is characterized by chronic ulcerations that are not usually painful.
Additional findings sometimes associated with PG include fever, localized tenderness, joint pain (arthralgia), and a general feeling of ill health (malaise). PG may occur as a secondary characteristic of another disorder, most often ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease.

