Pyruvate Kinase Deficiency

synonyms:
PKDPK deficiency

overview:
Summary
Pyruvate kinase deficiency (PKD) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by the premature destruction of red blood cells, which is called hemolytic anemia. Anemia is a general term for when there are low levels of red blood cells in the bloodstream, and hemolytic (or hemolysis) means that the red blood cells break down prematurely. Red blood cells are formed in the bone marrow and then are released into the bloodstream. When the youngest red cells are first released into the bloodstream, they are called reticulocytes. Red blood cells travel throughout the body delivering oxygen to the tissues. Healthy red blood cells last approximately 120 days.
PKD is caused by changes (variants or mutations) in thePKLRgene, which lead to a deficiency of the enzyme pyruvate kinase. These variants are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Pyruvate kinase is an enzyme that helps cells turn sugar (glucose) into energy (called adenosine triphosphate, ATP) in a process called glycolysis. Red cells rely on this process for energy, and so, pyruvate kinase deficiency leads to a deficiency in red cell energy and to premature red cell destruction (hemolysis). Instead of lasting 120 days, red cells with pyruvate kinase deficiency last only a few days to weeks.
The severity of PKD can vary greatly. In some people, it may cause mild symptoms, while in others more severe symptoms may develop.

symptoms:
Symptoms from pyruvate kinase deficiency can be highly variable. How it affects one person can be significantly different from how it affects another person. In some people, the disorder can be life-threatening at birth. Other individuals may have mild or no symptoms of the disorder and go undiagnosed into adulthood. Others may develop symptoms during childhood or as adults. The main finding, hemolytic anemia, is a chronic, lifelong condition.
NewbornsBefore birth, some developing fetuses with anemia can develop a condition called fetal hydrops. This is a serious condition in which large amounts of fluid builds up in the tissues and organs of the fetus. It develops because the heart must pump a greater volume of blood to deliver oxygen than normal because of anemia. Anemia in the developing fetus can also lead to poor growth or premature birth. Some newborns can have severe symptoms at birth with an enlarged liver and/or spleen, high blood pressure in the arteries in the lungs and the right side of the heart (pulmonary hypertension), evidence of inflammation and/or liver disease.
At birth, some infants may have significant anemia and severe jaundice, which is yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes. Jaundice is caused by high levels of bilirubin in the body. Normally, when old or damaged red blood cells are broken down in the spleen, bilirubin is released into the bloodstream. This type of bilirubin is called unconjugated (or indirect) bilirubin. The unconjugated bilirubin is taken up by the liver cells, converted to conjugated bilirubin and excreted into the intestines and then into the stools. With hemolysis, an excess of bilirubin is released into the bloodstream and the liver cannot keep up with the conjugation process. Unlike children and adults with elevated bilirubin levels, high bilirubin levels in infants can lead to kernicterus, a neurologic condition characterized by the accumulation of toxic levels of bilirubin. High bilirubin levels in newborns require aggressive treatment to attempt to avoid the risk of kernicterus.
Children and AdultsThe most common finding in children and adults is anemia. Anemia can cause tiredness, fatigue, increased need for sleep, weakness, lightheadedness, dizziness, irritability, headaches, pale skin color, difficulty breathing (dyspnea), shortness of breath and cardiac symptoms.
The degree of jaundice or scleral icterus is linked to the amount of total unconjugated bilirubin. This is determined both by the degree of hemolysis and by an individual’s ability to metabolize bilirubin, which is genetically determined. People with Gilbert syndrome have an inherited condition (two copies of a gene variant) that reduces the production of an enzyme involved in the processing of bilirubin in the liver. Gilbert syndrome is common, so it is possible for someone to inherit both PKD and Gilbert syndrome. Children and adults with PKD can develop gallstones. Gallstones are small, hard masses that form in the gallbladder and block the bile ducts and cause pain. Gallstones are a frequent complication in children and adults with PKD because of the increased unconjugated bilirubin. The risk of gallstones is life-long due to ongoing hemolysis.
Affected individuals can also develop an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly). One function of the spleen is to filter red blood cells. The spleen becomes enlarged because it filters out the abnormal red blood cells. An enlarged spleen does not typically cause pain.
Hemolytic episodes develop in the presence of stressors or triggers of hemolysis, which most often are infections and, therefore, more frequent in childhood. Pregnancy can also be a common hemolytic trigger. During these episodes, an individual’s symptoms worsen, such as fatigue, paleness, scleral icterus, jaundice and/or dark urine. An aplastic crisis is caused by parvovirus B19 infection (also called Fifth disease). This commonly causes a high fever and facial rash. In individuals with PKD, parvovirus infection reduces or stops reticulocyte production in the bone marrow and thereby decreases the hemoglobin level. Aplastic crises in individuals with PKD often require a blood transfusion.
Iron overload is one of the most common findings in patients with PKD. Iron overload can occur both in individuals who receive blood transfusions and in those who have never been transfused. Iron overload is the abnormal accumulation of iron in various organs of the body most commonly in the liver, but iron loading can also occur in the heart and hormone-producing organs (endocrine organs). Iron loading is not associated with symptoms until a significant amount of iron is deposited, so it is important to monitor iron studies regularly in all individuals with PKD.
Other complications can occur in PKD. Adolescents and adults commonly develop weakened bones (osteopenia or osteoporosis) with an increased risk of bone fractures. Adults can develop skin sores (ulcers), typically around the ankles. Other less common complications include pulmonary hypertension and blood cell production outside of the bone marrow (extramedullary hematopoiesis). Patients can develop mental health issues related to the chronic effects of PKD.

