Q fever

synonyms:
Q fever pneumonia, atypical pneumoniaCoxiella burnetii feverquery feverCoxiellosisnine-mile feverquadrilateral fever

overview:
Summary

Q fever is an infectious disease that is spread by the inhalation or ingestion of a bacterium known asCoxiella burnetii, which belongs to the order of Legionellales. Animals such as cattle, sheep and goats are common bacterial hosts for this bacterium.C. burnetiiis spread mainly by breathing contaminated air or eating or drinking contaminated food. Farm workers, especially those who work with animals, people who work in slaughterhouses and veterinarians are especially vulnerable to this disease. Other forms of transmission are rare but include tick bites and human to human transmission. Q fever causes highly variable symptoms ranging from acute (often self-limited) infection to fatal chronic infection. Progression of Q fever from acute infection to chronic fever occurs in less than 5% of patients. Infections that do not cause outward symptoms (subclinical) or no symptoms (asymptomatic) are also common. Acute Q fever is treated with antibiotics. Treatment for chronic Q fever is more complex and depends on an individual’s presenting symptoms. People of all ages are susceptible to Q fever.

Introduction

Since infection can occur because of airborne transmission and the bacterium is very resistant to environmental conditions such heat and pressure,C. burnettiwas included on the list of possible bacteriological weapons.

symptoms:
The symptoms of Q fever can vary dramatically from one person to another. Infection can result in no apparent symptoms (asymptomatic); an acute form of disease characterized by a flu-like illness that either goes away on its own (self-limited) or causes more serious symptoms; or a chronic form that can be associated with serious complications. Researchers believe that a variety of factors may influence the severity of Q fever including age, gender and a person’s general health, including pre-existing medical conditions (e.g., heart disease).

Acute Q Fever

The acute form of Q fever starts approximately two to three weeks after exposure to the bacterium. Acute Q fever is characterized by flu-like symptoms such as high fevers, chills, muscle pain (myalgia), muscle weakness, fatigue and headaches. In some patients, fevers do not occur. Additional nonspecific symptoms can potentially occur including cough, chest pain, sore throat, skin rash or gastrointestinal symptoms. Many people also suffer from small areas of inflammation (granuloma).
Pneumonia and inflammation of the liver (hepatitis) are commonly associated with acute Q fever. Pneumonia is often mild but can potentially progress to cause acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Hepatitis may cause abnormal enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly). More rarely, it can cause yellowing of the skin and the whites of the eyes (jaundice). Other symptoms can occur in some affected individuals including inflammation of the muscular wall of the heart (myocarditis), inflammation of the sac-like membrane that surrounds the heart (pericarditis) and the development of a purple skin rash caused by bleeding (hemorrhaging) from tiny blood vessels just below the surface of the skin.
Acute Q fever may present as a neurological disease caused by inflammation of the thin membrane covering the brain and spinal cord or the brain (meningoencephalitis). In some individuals, acute Q fever can affect the kidneys, thyroids or genitals.

Chronic Q Fever

Chronic Q fever may occur months to years after acute disease or may occur without a previous history of symptomatic acute Q fever. Most cases of chronic Q fever occur in individuals with predisposing conditions such as existing heart valve or blood vessel (vascular) abnormalities or a compromised immune system.
The most common manifestation of chronic Q fever is inflammation of the thin membrane lining the inside of the heart and heart valves (infective endocarditis), potentially damaging the heart valves or heart tissue. Inflammation of heart muscle (myocarditis) is rarely seen but also possible. Other symptoms include inflammation of blood vessels (vasculitis), low red blood cell count (hemoglobin), low platelet count (thrombocytopenia), anticardiolipin IgG antibody positivity, antimitochondrial antibody positivity and blood in urine (hematuria). Affected individuals can develop congestive heart failure, a serious complication in which a limited ability to circulate blood to the lungs and the rest of the body results in fluid buildup in the heart, lungs and various body tissues. In addition, Q fever can cause liver inflammation (hepatitis), enlarged liver (hepatomegaly), enlarged liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly), fluid around lungs (pleural effusions) and respiratory distress.
Less commonly, chronic Q fever can present as an infection of the bones and joints (osteoarticular infection) such as osteomyelitis or osteoarthritis, which can cause bone and joint pain. Vascular infections, chronic hepatitis and chronic pulmonary disease are also seen in some patients. Chronic hepatitis can cause enlargement of the liver or jaundice. Chronic pulmonary disease can cause difficulty breathing (dyspnea) and other respiratory abnormalities. Other less common symptoms include abnormal heart valve morphology, immunodeficiency, increased circulating antibody level, flat and raised skin lesions (maculopapular exanthema), pneumonia, red or purple spots on the skin (purpura) and rheumatoid factor positivity.
Individuals with chronic Q fever may also experience a variety of symptoms similar to those experienced by acute Q Fever patients, including prolonged fevers (although fevers are often absent), joint pain (arthralgia), muscle pain (myalgia), night sweats, chills, fatigue and unintended weight loss.Some individuals with Q fever develop long-term complications such as chronic, persistent fatigue. Some researchers believe that infection with Q fever increases an individual’s risk of developing cardiovascular disease later in life.
The rarest symptoms (approximately 1%- 4% of individuals) include abnormal function of the left ventricle, abnormal amyloid build-up (amyloidosis), inflammation of the gallbladder (cholecystitis), inflammation of the brain (encephalitis), lupus anticoagulant, swollen lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy) or inflammation of fluid and membrane around the brain and spinal cord (meningitis).

