Rabies

synonyms:
HydrophobiaLyssa

overview:
Rabies is an infectious disease that can affect all species of warmblooded animals, including man. This disorder is transmitted by the saliva of an infected animal and is caused by a virus (Neurotropic lyssavirus) that affects the salivary glands and the central nervous system. The symptoms may lead to serious complications if the virus is not treated immediately.

symptoms:
The symptoms of rabies usually develop within 20-60 days after a bite or scratch from an animal infected with the rabies virus.  The incubation period is the time between the exposure and the appearance of the first neurologic symptoms.  The incubation period is usually shorter when the sight of exposure is closer to the brain.  The initial symptoms may be a general feeling of discomfort or uneasiness, nervousness, anxiety, insomnia, depression, loss of appetite, fever, chills, cough, sore throat, headache, nausea, vomiting, and pain at the site of exposure.  Serious neurological symptoms usually present themselves two to ten days after the initial symptoms.  There are two types of syndromes that may develop during this neurological period:  furious and/or paralytic (sluggishness and early paralysis).
The hyperactive or “furious” syndrome is usually characterized by thrashing, agitation, biting, spasms of the pharynx and larynx, choking, gagging, fear of water (hydrophobia), hyperventilation (very rapid breathing), and an alteration in the rhythm of the heart beat (cardiac arrhythmias).  In about twenty percent of the patients a “paralytic” syndrome may occur.  This syndrome is characterized by paralysis that starts at the bottom of a limb and moves upward (especially in the extremity that has been bitten), increased blood pressure, rapid heart rate, confusion, hallucinations and disorientation.  During this time the patient may have increased periods of hyperactivity, stiffness in the back of the neck, and an abnormal increase in the number of cells in the cerebrospinal fluid ending with the onset of coma or respiratory failure.

