Rabson-Mendenhall Syndrome

synonyms:
Mendenhall syndrome

overview:
Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome is an extremely rare genetic disorder characterized by severe insulin resistance. Insulin, a hormone produced by the pancreas, regulates blood sugar levels by promoting the movement of glucose (a simple sugar) into cells for energy production or into the liver and fat cells for storage.
Initial symptoms of Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome include head and facial differences (craniofacial region), abnormalities of the teeth and nails, and skin abnormalities such as acanthosis nigricans, a skin disorder characterized by abnormally increased coloration (hyperpigmentation) and “velvety” thickening (hyperkeratosis) of the skin, particularly of skin fold regions, such as of the neck, groin and under the arms. In most patients, additional symptoms are present. Infants are found to have very little fat and may not grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive) despite frequent feedings. Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.

symptoms:
The symptoms of Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome vary greatly from person to person. Some individuals may be affected more severely than others. The disorder can potentially cause life-threatening complications during childhood or adolescence. Affected individuals may not have all the symptoms listed below. Affected individuals or parents of affected children should talk to their physicians and medical team about their specific case and associated symptoms.
Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome may become apparent during the first year of life or during early childhood. Initial symptoms include failure to thrive, abnormalities of the teeth and nails including early eruption of teeth (premature dentition), abnormally large teeth (macrodontia), irregular and crowded teeth and thickened nails. Individuals with Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome may also have a coarse, prematurely-aged facial appearance with a prominent jaw (prognathism). Affected individuals also have large ears, full lips and a furrowed tongue.
Another early symptom of Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome is increased coloration (hyperpigmentation) and “velvety” thickening (hyperkeratosis) of the skin, particularly of skin fold regions, such as of the neck and groin and under the arms (acanthosis nigricans). Affected individuals may also have dry skin.
Additional symptoms associated with Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome may include abdominal swelling (distension) and abnormal enlargement of the clitoris in females and the penis in males. Affected individuals may have excessive hair growth (hypertrichosis) and some females may have a male pattern of hair growth (hirsutism). Deficiency or absence of fatty tissue (adipose tissue) may also be present. Some individuals may attain puberty at an early age (precocious puberty). Short stature is an additional characteristic that may also be observed.
Rarely, individuals with Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome may have an large pineal gland (pineal hyperplasia). The pineal gland is a tiny organ in the brain that secretes melatonin, a hormone that helps to regulate sleep cycles and metabolism and is involved with certain aspects of sexual development. Affected individuals often have altered melatonin secrete, which contributes to the development of certain symptoms associated with Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome.
Because individuals with Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome cannot use insulin properly they may have high blood sugar levels (hyperglycemia) after eating a meal (postprandial) and low blood sugar levels (hypoglycemia) when not eating. Along with the high blood sugars after eating and frequent low blood sugars in the fasting state, the blood insulin level will be quite elevated.
As children with Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome age they may develop more serious complications including diabetes mellitus, enlarged, cystic ovaries and risk for dehydration. Diabetes may result in individuals having decreased resistance to life-threatening infections. Another life-threatening complication called ketoacidosis may also occur, secondary to diabetes mellitus. Ketoacidosis is elevated levels of acids in the body accompanied by accumulation of ketone bodies. (chemical substances normally produced by fatty acid metabolism in the liver.) Most individuals with Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome also have abnormalities affecting the kidneys, such as nephrocalcinosis.

