Rapid-onset Obesity with Hypothalamic Dysfunction, Hypoventilation, and Autonomic Dysregulation

synonyms:
late onset central hypoventilation syndrome with hypothalamic dysfunctionLO-CCHS/HDROHHAD

overview:
Rapid-onset obesity with hypothalamic dysfunction, hypoventilation, and autonomic dysregulation (ROHHAD) is an ultra-rare disorder of respiratory control and autonomic nervous system (ANS) regulation, with endocrine system abnormalities. Respiratory control is a function of the ANS that is responsible for changing breathing in response to varied activities of daily living (ex. exercise, sleep, eating) and in response to changes in oxygen and carbon dioxide. The ANS is the portion of the nervous system that controls or regulates many automatic involuntary body functions including breathing, heart rate, blood pressure, temperature regulation, bowel and bladder control, and more. The endocrine system is regulated by the hypothalamus, and through hormones it controls growth, energy and water balance, sexual maturation and fertility as well as response to stress.
ROHHAD presents after 1.5 years of age, in otherwise healthy children. The rapid-onset weight gain (often 20-30 pounds in 3-12 months) is typically the herald of the disease and the harbinger of the later features of the ROHHAD phenotype. The acronym ROHHAD describes the typical sequence of symptoms experienced by children with ROHHAD, in the order of their appearance. The clinical features of ROHHAD seem to “unfold” with advancing age in each child. ROHHAD was first described in 1965 (albeit under a different name) and since that time at least 200 children have been reported in the literature or identified with this disorder. Because of the high prevalence of cardiorespiratory arrest, early recognition and treatment of the symptoms associated with ROHHAD are essential and may be lifesaving.

symptoms:
Children with ROHHAD are seemingly healthy before the rapid-onset weight gain, making the diagnosis even more challenging to parents and health care personnel. Between 1.5 and 7 years of age, these children begin to manifest abnormalities that will evolve into the features of ROHHAD. Most commonly, the first sign is dramatic (often 20-30 pounds) and rapid (over 3 to 12 months) weight gain without associated abnormal increase in hunger (hyperphagia). This rapid-onset obesity is considered a sign of hypothalamic dysfunction (abnormality of the endocrine system). Other hypothalamic abnormalities may not be detected at the time of the rapid weight gain but will be identified any time from months to years following the rapid-onset obesity. These other hypothalamic/endocrine abnormalities may include inability to maintain normal water balance in the body (leading to abnormally high or low sodium levels), high prolactin levels, low thyroid hormone, growth hormone insufficiency, early or late puberty, and low cortisol among other abnormalities. Children with ROHHAD can have variable timing and number of these symptoms of hypothalamic dysfunction, but all will have some abnormalities, especially increased prolactin. After the rapid weight gain, children with ROHHAD will begin to show breathing abnormalities despite normal lungs. Some children may present with obstructive sleep apnea which means that airflow is intermittently blocked during sleep; they may have snoring and they may have pauses in breathing related to the air flow blockage (obstructive apnea). Because obstructive sleep apnea is not unusual in young obese children, health care personnel may not be alarmed at this stage, and a connection to the ROHHAD phenotype might be delayed. All children with ROHHAD, whether they had preceding OSA or not, develop alveolar hypoventilation with very shallow breathing during sleep (nap and night). In more severely affected patients with ROHHAD, the hypoventilation is apparent awake and asleep. As a result of altered control of breathing, low oxygen saturation and elevated carbon dioxide occur during wakefulness as well as sleep, without any shortness of breath (awake) or awakening (from sleep). This hypoventilation/control of breathing deficit is the most life-threatening feature of ROHHAD, yet it is often unnoticed until after a dramatic event such as a cardiorespiratory arrest. Therefore, all children with ROHHAD will require help with their breathing, relying on a ventilator to prevent low oxygen or increased carbon dioxide. Approximately half of the children with ROHHAD require ventilator support during sleep only and the other half require ventilator support awake and asleep (24-hours per day), though the ventilatory needs of a child with ROHHAD may vary with advancing age (and unfolding of the clinical features of ROHHAD). This ventilator support can be provided with bi-level positive airway pressure through a mask that fits tightly at the nose or with nasal pillows or a full-face mask or with a mechanical ventilator through a surgically made hole in the airway called a tracheostomy, or potentially with diaphragm pacing (still requiring a tracheostomy).
Also, after the rapid weight gain, the symptoms of ANS dysregulation (ANSD) become more apparent. As described above, ANSD means that there are abnormalities with the “automatic” regulation of different organ systems of the body. At some point, all patients with ROHHAD have signs of ANSD. These include eye abnormalities such as altered pupil response to light, “lazy eye”(strabismus), intestinal abnormalities such as altered motility which causes chronic constipation or diarrhea, temperature dysregulation with episodes of very high body temperature (hyperthermia) or more typically very low body temperatures (hypothermia), icy cold hands and feet, decreased sensation of pain, low heart rate that may be so slow that a cardiac pacemaker is required, altered sweating, and many other symptoms reflecting dysregulation of automatic functions.
Some individuals (approximately 40%) with ROHHAD will develop anatomic malformations of the ANS which include tumors of neural crest origin (meaning, they originate from a specific type of cell that is seen very early in development of the body). These neural crest tumors found in children with ROHHAD are most commonly ganglioneuromas or ganglioneuroblastomas, but neuroblastomas have also been reported. These neural crest tumors are found in the chest or abdomen, or anywhere along the sympathetic nervous system chain (part of ANS), are present but likely very small in early infancy, and can be identified at any age (though characteristically in early childhood). Thus far, no children with ROHHAD have anatomic/structural malformations of the intestine such as Hirschsprung disease (absent ganglion cells of the distal intestine). This is in contrast to children with another ultra-rare disorder termed congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS), which co-occurs with Hirschsprung disease in ~30% of individuals with CCHS. Tumors of neural crest origin have been described in patients with CCHS, though rarely with polyalanine repeat expansionPHOX2Bmutations (PARMs) (genotypes 20/29 and 20/33; if present typically ganglioneuromas and ganglioneuroblastomas) but more commonly with the non-PARMs (NPARMs) (~40% of cases; most will have a neuroblastoma but less commonly ganglioneuroma or ganglioneuroblastoma).
Bougneres, et al. suggested the suffix “NET” be added to the name designated by Ize-Ludlow et al in 2007, “ROHHAD”, because of the findings of associated neural crest tumors in a subset of patients with ROHHAD. Because only a subset of patients (~40%) with ROHHAD have been shown to develop these neuroendocrine tumors, and they may be ganglioneuromas or ganglioneuroblastomas but not typically neuroblastoma, the name ROHHADNET is potentially misleading. Currently, there is insufficient evidence that individuals presenting with tumors represent a distinct entity.  Further, the development of neural crest tumors has been reported to occur as late as 7 and even in one case 16 years after the onset of obesity. Consequently, making co-occurrence of tumors of neural crest origin requisite to the diagnosis of ROHHAD would lead to missed diagnosis of many of the children and may subsequently lead to devastating consequences due to the high incidence of cardiorespiratory arrest in this population.
A remarkably high percentage of children with ROHHAD have normal or high IQs, suggesting that IQ in children with ROHHAD likely has many related factors. A small subset of individuals with ROHHAD have behavioral, mood, and developmental disorders such that the intelligence quotient (IQ) score may be reduced. Preliminarily, those children with the behavioral and mood disorders have more typically had delayed diagnosis and/or suboptimal ventilatory support. Some children with ROHHAD may develop seizures, though this feature may be related to episodes of low oxygen (hypoxemia) levels due to inadequate ventilator support.

