Rasmussen Encephalitis

synonyms:
chronic encephalitis and epilepsychronic localized (focal) encephalitisepilepsy, hemiplegia and intellectual disabilitiesRasmussen syndrome (RE)

overview:
Rasmussen encephalitis, sometimes referred to as Rasmussen syndrome, is a rare disorder of the central nervous system characterized by chronic progressive inflammation (encephalitis) of one cerebral hemisphere. As a result, the patient usually experiences frequent episodes of uncontrolled electrical disturbances in the brain that cause epileptic seizures (epilepsy) and progressive cerebral destruction. With time, further symptoms may include progressive weakness of one side of the body (hemiparesis), language problems (if on the left side of the brain) and intellectual disabilities. The exact cause of this disorder is not known. The two leading ideas are that the brain inflammation might be a reaction of a foreign antigen (infection) or an autoimmune disease limited to one side of the brain resulting in brain damage. It occurs mostly, but not always, in children between the ages of two and ten years, and in many patients the course of the disease is most severe during the first 8 to 12 months. After the peak inflammatory response is reached, the progression of this disorder appears to slow or stop, and the patient is left with permanent neurological deficits.

symptoms:
Typically, affected individuals develop focal seizures that may progress to near continuous seizures termed epilepsia partialis continua (EPC). EPC is characterized by a rapid, rhythmic succession of contractions and relaxations of a muscle or muscle group (myoclonus), particularly of the arms, legs, and face, that may occur singularly or in a repetitive, continuous series. In Rasmussen this occurs consistently on one side of the body opposite the side of the inflammation.
Most affected children will exhibit progressive paralysis of one side of the body (hemiparesis) and if the seizures continue developmental disabilities. In many cases, the development of physical and mental abilities of affected children may cease (developmental arrest). In addition, affected children may lose previously acquired physical and mental abilities (developmental regression). Some affected children may exhibit degeneration (atrophy) of one side of the brain and/or progressive confusion, disorientation and deterioration of intellectual abilities (dementia).

