Reactive Arthritis

synonyms:
Fiessinger-Leroy diseaseReiter's syndrome

overview:
Reactive arthritis is a general term for a form of joint inflammation (arthritis) that develops as a “reaction” to an infection in another area of the body (i.e., outside of the joints). Joint inflammation is characterized by redness, swelling, pain and warmth in and around the affected joint. In reactive arthritis, the large joints of the lower limbs and the sacroiliac joints are most often affected. Two other common symptoms of reactive arthritis are inflammation of the urinary tract and inflammation of the membrane (conjunctiva) that lines the eyelids (conjunctivitis). These three characteristic symptoms may occur separately, all at once or not at all. Additional symptoms such as fever, weight loss, lower back pain and heel pain may also occur. Reactive arthritis usually develops following a bout with certain bacterial infections including Chlamydia, Salmonella, Shigella, Yersinia, and Campylobacter.
Reactive arthritis belongs to a group of related disorders known as the spondyloarthritidies. These disorders are linked by the association of similar symptoms and a specific genetic marker calledHLA-B27. Symptoms common to these disorders include arthritis, especially of the lower limbs, lower back pain and enthesitis, a condition characterized by inflammation at the spot where tendons attach to bone. This group of disorders includes reactive arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, undifferentiated spondyloarthritis and spondyloarthritis associated with inflammatory bowel disease.
Reactive arthritis is a poorly defined disorder that has been described in the medical literature under many different names. No precise diagnostic or classification criteria have been developed that are universally agreed upon in the medical community.

symptoms:
Some individuals with reactive arthritis may only develop mild arthritis without eye or urinary tract involvement. Other individuals may develop a severe case of reactive arthritis that can dramatically limit daily activity. Symptoms usually last anywhere from 3 to 12 months and may come and go. In approximately 30-50 percent of patients, symptoms may return later or become a chronic (greater than 6 month) long-term problem. It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis. The specific symptoms and their severity can vary greatly from one person to another.
The symptoms of reactive arthritis may come and go over a period of time ranging from several weeks to several months. Symptoms usually develop one to six weeks after a gastrointestinal or genitourinary infection. Inflammation of the joints, urinary tract and eyes are the most common findings. Additional symptoms may also develop.
Arthritis can occur before or at the same time as eye and urinary symptoms or after they have subsided. Arthritis usually affects the joints of the lower legs causing pain, redness and swelling in the knees, ankles and feet. Other joints such as the wrists, elbows, and fingers are affected less frequently. Onset is usually rapid with two to four joints becoming involved within a few days. Heel pain is also common. Heel pain is caused by enthesitis, a condition characterized by inflammation at the spot where the tendon attaches to bone. In some cases, the toes and/or fingers may become inflamed and swollen (dactylitis) so that they appear large and stubby. Pain in the lower back or buttocks may also occur.
Urinary tract involvement in reactive arthritis may not cause any symptoms (asymptomatic). In other cases, urinary tract inflammation may be the first symptom to develop, especially in men. Urinary tract symptoms are often absent in women. In some men, urinary tract inflammation can cause pain or a burning sensation when urinating, increased frequency of urination, or fluid discharge when urinating. In severe cases, inflammation of the prostate gland (prostatitis) may occur. In spite of these symptoms, the urine culture will typically be negative.
Women with urinary tract inflammation due to reactive arthritis may develop inflammation of the cervix, inflammation of the fallopian tubes (salpingitis), or inflammation of the vulva and vagina (vulvovaginitis). Some affected women may experience a burning sensation when urinating.
Some affected individuals develop inflammation of the membrane (conjunctiva) lining the eyelids (conjunctivitis). Some people may also develop inflammation of the anterior uvea (uveitis), the part of the eye that consists of the iris, choroid and the ciliary body. Conjunctivitis and uveitis may cause redness and swelling of the eyes, eye pain, blurred vision, an abnormal sensitivity to light (photophobia) and crusting in the morning. Blurred vision and photophobia are more common with uveitis. Eye symptoms may occur early in the course of reactive arthritis. In some cases, symptoms may come and go during the duration of the disease (wax and wane).
General, vague symptoms that can be associated with many different diseases may also occur in individuals with reactive arthritis. Such symptoms including fatigue, fever, unintended weight loss, and a general feeling of poor health (malaise).
Additional symptoms may potentially affect individuals with reactive arthritis. In some men, small, shallow, painless ulcers may form on the penis; this is referred to as circinate balanitis. These ulcers may precede the development of arthritis. Occasionally these ulcers can form a plaque-like lesion and become chronic. In addition, some individuals may develop small, superficial ulcers in the mouth, especially the tongue or hard palate. These lesions may come and go, are usually painless and often go unnoticed. Acute diarrhea may occur in cases that develop after infection with Shigella, Yersinia, Campylobacter or Salmonella. Diarrhea may precede the development of musculoskeletal symptoms by up to one month.
Some individuals with reactive arthritis develop a skin condition called keratoderma blennorrhagia. This skin lesion usually affects the palms or soles and may consist of reddish, raised, waxy bumps or nodules. These bumps usually spread, eventually coming together (coalescing) to form one larger, scaly rash that may resemble psoriasis. The nails of some individuals with reactive arthritis may become thickened.

