Recessive Multiple Epiphyseal Dysplasia

synonyms:
EDM4MED4Multiple Epiphyseal Dysplasia Type 4Multiple Epiphyseal Dysplasia with ClubfootrMED

overview:
Summary
Recessive multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (rMED) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by abnormal skeletal development mainly affecting the growth zones of the long tubular bones (dysplasia) including those affecting bones of the hands, hips, knees and feet. Joint pain, particularly of the hips and/or knees, is also common and develops during childhood. Affected individuals may exhibit additional abnormalities such as mild sideways curvature of the spine (scoliosis). Certain malformations such as clubfoot or cleft palate can be present at birth (congenital). rMED is caused by mutations in theSLC26A2gene. This gene is also known as the diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transport orDTDSTgene. The term ‘recessive’ in the disorder’s name refers to the how the disorder is inherited (autosomal recessive inheritance). rMED is a form of skeletal dysplasia (osteochondrodysplasia), a broad term for a group of disorders characterized by abnormal growth or development of cartilage and bone. The disorder is also known as multiple epiphyseal dysplasia type 4.
Introduction
Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia is a general term for a group of disorders characterized by abnormal development of the bone and cartilage of the epiphyses, which are the rounded ends or “heads” of the long bones. In the past, the disorder was subdivided into the milder Ribbing type and the more severe Fairbank type. According to new classification, multiple epiphyseal dysplasia represents a group of disorders and these disorders are classified according to mutations in different genes, and the types of MED are classified according to the causative gene. However, not all genes behind MED have been identified yet. Most subtypes are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. rMED belongs to a family of skeletal diseases with a variable severity of phenotype caused by different mutations in the same gene. This group includes the following diagnoses from the most severe to the mildest end of the spectrum: achondrogenesis type 1B, atelogenesis type 2, diastrophic dysplasia and rMED is the mildest form.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms and physical findings may vary from one person to another. Affected individuals may develop relatively mild symptoms and, in some cases, individuals reach adulthood without ever receiving a diagnosis of recessive multiple epiphyseal dysplasia. However, most individuals are diagnosed with a skeletal dysplasia at some point during childhood. Other individuals may have more severe complications.
Approximately 50% of affected infants have a skeletal malformation that is present at birth such as clubfoot, fingers may be fixed or ‘locked’ in a bent position (clinodactyly), or abnormal closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate).
Affected children will usually display symptoms or signs of abnormal bone and cartilage development (skeletal dysplasia) that can include short, stubby fingers and toes (brachydactyly), broadening of the space between the first and second toes, and mild, abnormal sideways curvature of the spine (scoliosis). Clubfoot, clinodactyly or cleft palate may also first become apparent during childhood. In some children, ears may get swollen in infancy as in diastrophic dysplasias. Diminished muscle tone (muscular hypotonia) may be significant but improves with physical therapy. Also attention has to be paid to the cervical spine especially if an operation is needed with general anesthesia.
Affected individuals also experience early onset pain and stiffness in affected joints (early-onset arthritis) that can develop in chronic joint pain (arthralgia) and damage to the joints. The hips and the knees are commonly affected. Affected individuals often develop misalignment or malformation of the hips (hip dysplasia). Some affected individuals develop a waddling manner of walking (abnormal gait), and mild short stature can occur, but is not a frequent finding. Multiple joints may be affected, particularly in adolescents. Joint pain is usually worse after physical exercise. Some individuals develop deformity or rigidity of affected joints due to shortening or hardening of muscles, tendons or other tissue (contractures).
A specific finding associated with rMED is a double-layered or partitioned patella. The patella, or the kneecap, is the triangular bone that protects the front of the knee joint. A double patella has two bony (osseous) layers instead of one with cartilage in between. A double patella may not be associated with any symptoms (asymptomatic) or may lead to frequent dislocations, knee pain, and potentially functional disability of the knee. In some cases, a double patella resolves on its own in adulthood.

