Recessive Titinopathy

overview:
Summary
Recessive titinopathy is a condition caused by specific changes called disease-causing variants in a gene calledTTN(pronounced “titin”). Disease-causing variants are sometimes referred to as ‘pathogenic’ or ‘likely pathogenic’ variants on diagnostic reports. Individuals with recessive titinopathy have two disease-causing variants inTTN– one in each copy of theirTTNgene.
The most common symptoms of recessive titinopathy are muscle weakness and breathing difficulties. Some affected individuals also develop scoliosis and heart problems. The severity of the condition and rate of progression are quite variable. The reasons for this variability are not currently well understood.
Muscle biopsy findings are also variable. Structural (myopathic) differences are sometimes present. In other individuals the biopsy shows dystrophic changes suggestive of ongoing muscle breakdown and regeneration.
Introduction
A range of different recessively inherited titinopathies (recessive titinopathies) have been described to date. Three of the best characterized subtypes are autosomal recessive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy-10 (LGMDR10, previously known as type 2J), recessive distal titinopathy and congenital titinopathy. In this report, recessive titinopathies are considered clinical variations of the same disorder.
There are also several different dominantly inherited forms of titinopathy (dominant titinopathies) caused by a disease-causing variant in just one copy of theTTNgene. These conditions result in a range of muscle and heart problems that usually do not develop until adulthood. Examples include tibial muscular dystrophy (TMD), hereditary myopathy with early-onset respiratory failure (HMERF), dominant titinopathy andTTN-related dilated cardiomyopathy.

symptoms:
Recessive titinopathy is a muscle condition that can affect many different parts of the body. The muscle weakness caused by this condition often develops prenatally or during early childhood. However, sometimes the weakness develops later in life (later childhood, adolescence or early adulthood).
Recessive titinopathy is quite variable in terms of severity. Some affected individuals develop milder muscle weakness. Others develop much more severe weakness. For some affected individuals, the degree of weakness remains stable over many years. In others, the degree of weakness becomes more marked over time. The reasons for these differences in severity and rate of progression are not yet well understood. It is therefore difficult to predict how this condition will impact an affected individual over their lifespan (prognosis).
The most common symptoms of recessive titinopathy are:
Muscle weaknesswhich results in difficulty moving the arms, legs, trunk, head and/or neck. Sometimes there is also weakness of the muscles of the face which can make it harder to make normal facial expressions or make the eyelids appear slightly “droopy” (eyelid ptosis).
Bone and joint changes such as:
o   Joint tightness that can make it harder to bend certain joints, for example the hips, knees, elbows, wrists, fingers and/or feet
o   Spinal changes such as spinal stiffness which makes bending forward more difficult, or a fixed curvature of the spine (scoliosis)
o   Changes in the shape of the chest caused by weakness of the chest wall muscles
Feeding difficulties: Weakness of the muscles used when eating may result in difficulties chewing and swallowing.
Breathing difficulties: Weakness of the chest muscles and the main internal breathing muscle (diaphragm) that sits just under the lungs sometimes results in difficulties coughing and/or breathing. Breathing difficulties are often more pronounced during sleep when muscles are generally more relaxed. Coughing and breathing difficulties can be present from birth or develop over time.
Heart problems:The heart may not develop in the normal way duringin uterodevelopment (congenital heart abnormality) or become unusually large and less efficient at pumping blood around the body with increasing age (dilated cardiomyopathy). In some affected individuals, an irregular heartbeat may develop (arrhythmia). Current evidence suggests that approximately half of all individuals with recessive titinopathy will develop a problem with their heart during their lifetime.

