Recurrent Pericarditis

overview:
Summary
Recurrent pericarditis is a disease characterized by recurrent episodes of inflammation of the pericardium, which is the sac containing the heart. The main symptom associated with an episode of pericarditis is chest pain that is typically sharp and worse when taking a deep breath (pleuritic). Shortness of breath (dyspnea) also occurs frequently. Recurrent pericarditis can develop in individuals of any age. The first-line therapy for pericarditis, including for recurrent cases, is a combination of colchicine and either aspirin or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen. Although recurrent pericarditis can significantly affect quality of life, it is typically not life threatening or associated with serious illness, and patients are usually well between episodes.
Introduction
As discussed below, there are numerous causes (etiologies) of pericarditis. Most cases of recurrent pericarditis are idiopathic, that is, the specific cause is not known. Pericarditis is often classified based on the timing of symptoms. A new-onset episode of pericarditis is called acute pericarditis. Episodes lasting more than 4 to 6 weeks but less than 3 months are called incessant pericarditis, while episodes lasting more than 3 months are known as chronic pericarditis. Recurrent pericarditis is defined as an episode of acute pericarditis that occurs at least 4 to 6 weeks after the resolution of a prior episode. Recurrences can occur months or even years after an initial episode.

symptoms:
The main symptom of pericarditis is chest pain, which is present in the vast majority of affected individuals. Typically, the pain is described as sharp and worse when coughing or taking a deep breath (pleuritic). The typical pain seen in pericarditis is also worse when lying down and is partially relieved when leaning forward. It can radiate to the neck, upper back or shoulders. Other symptoms that are associated with pericarditis include shortness of breath (dyspnea), fever, fatigue, malaise and the sensation of an irregular heartbeat (palpitations). Another feature frequently seen in pericarditis is accumulation of fluid in the space between the heart and the pericardium (pericardial sac), which is known as a pericardial effusion. The symptoms seen with a second or subsequent episode of recurrent pericarditis are often similar to the first event, although they tend to be less severe with recurrences. An episode of pericarditis can last days to weeks or longer. Although the symptoms of pericarditis can significantly affect quality of life, affected individuals typically have no symptoms between episodes. The number of episodes of recurrent pericarditis varies greatly between patients.
The two most serious complications of pericarditis are an effusion causing cardiac tamponade and constrictive pericarditis. Cardiac tamponade occurs when a pericardial effusion becomes large enough to impair contraction of the heart. Symptoms of cardiac tamponade include dyspnea, chest discomfort, fatigue, fluid accumulation in the body (edema), and low blood pressure (hypotension). In severe cases, cardiac tamponade can impair cardiac function to the point where it compromises delivery of blood and oxygen to the organs (cardiogenic shock). Constrictive pericarditis is a consequence of chronic pericardial inflammation and is characterized by scarring (fibrosis) and loss of elasticity of the pericardium. The main symptoms of constrictive pericarditis are dyspnea, edema, shortness of breath when lying flat (orthopnea) and chest pain. Fortunately, both cardiac tamponade and constrictive pericarditis are very rare complications of recurrent idiopathic pericarditis, although the risk of constrictive pericarditis is higher with certain other causes of pericarditis (see the “Causes” section below for more details). Overall, most patients can live a productive life with a very low risk of mortality related to recurrent pericarditis.

