Recurrent Respiratory Papillomatosis

synonyms:
juvenile-onset laryngeal papillomatosislaryngeal papillomatosis

overview:
Summary
Recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (RRP) is a rare disorder characterized by the development of small, wart-like growths (papillomas) in the respiratory tract. The respiratory tract is the system of organs within the body that allows individuals to breathe. The respiratory tract includes the nose, mouth, throat (pharynx), voice box (larynx), windpipe (trachea), various airway passages (bronchi) and lungs. Papillomas can develop anywhere along the respiratory tract, but most often affect the larynx and the vocal cords (laryngeal papillomatosis). Less often, the disorder affects the area within the mouth (oral cavity), trachea and bronchi. Only in rare cases do these growths spread to affect the lungs. Papillomas are noncancerous (benign), but in extremely rare cases can undergo cancerous (malignant) transformation. Although benign, papillomas can cause severe, even life-threatening airway obstruction and respiratory complications. In RRP, papillomas tend to grow back after they have been removed. RRP can affect children, adolescents or adults and is caused by infection with human papillomavirus (HPV), although exposure to the virus alone may be insufficient to cause the disease.
Introduction
RRP is generally broken down into two subtypes – the juvenile-onset form and the adult-onset form. Juvenile cases develop before the age of 12 and are generally more aggressive and recurring. Children tend to need surgical treatment more often than adults. The disorder tends to improve in late childhood. Although aggressive disease is more common in children, adults can still potentially develop an aggressive form of the disorder.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms, course of the disease, and severity of RRP can vary greatly from one person to another. In some people, the disease may resolve without treatment (spontaneous remissions) or it may remain stable requiring only periodic intervention (e.g. only a few surgeries during their lifetime). In other peoople, the disease may be aggressive requiring frequent medical intervention and potentially more than 100 surgeries during a person’s lifetime.
The most common presenting symptom of RRP is hoarseness. Hoarseness may become progressively worse, and the voice of an affected individual may be weak, raspy or sound low in pitch or strained. The severity of voice problems can vary from one person to another due, in part, to the size and specific locations of papillomas. Affected individuals may develop labored, noisy breathing (stridor) due to obstruction of the airway. Initially, stridor may occur when breathing in (inspiratory stridor), but eventually occurs both when breathing in and out (biphasic stridor). Some individuals may exhibit difficulty speaking (dysphonia) or lose their voice entirely (aphonia). Affected infants may also have a weak cry, episodes of choking and fail to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive).
Additional symptoms that can develop include a chronic cough, difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), shortness of breath or difficulty breathing (dyspnea), the sensation of a foreign body in the throat, and choking episodes.
Left untreated, papillomas can eventually compromise the airways, resulting in life-threatening breathing difficulties (acute respiratory distress). If RRP spreads to the lungs, affected individuals can potentially experience recurrent pneumonia, chronic lung disease (bronchiectasis) and, ultimately, progressive pulmonary failure. In extremely rare cases (i.e., less than 1% of cases), papillomas can become cancerous (malignant transformation) developing into squamous cell carcinoma.

