Refractory Celiac Disease

synonyms:
intractable celiac spruerefractory celiac disease

overview:
Refractory celiac disease (RCD) is a complex autoimmune disorder much like the more common celiac disease but, unlike celiac disease, it is resistant or unresponsive to at least 12 months of treatment with a strict gluten-free diet. Gliadin, a component of the wheat storage protein gluten, together with similar proteins in barley and rye, are the villains that trigger the immune reaction in celiac disease. The diagnosis of RCD is made by exclusion, especially of any other disorder that can affect the huge number of thread-like projections that line the interior of the intestine (intestinal villi), such as intestinal lymphoma, Crohn’s disease, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth or hypogammaglobulinemia.
The intestinal villi are the means by which the gut absorbs fluids and nutrients. In celiac disease and refractory celiac disease, these villi shrink and shrivel (atrophy) affecting the absorption of nutrients via the intestines. In celiac disease, treatment by means of a strict gluten-free diet is usually sufficient to overcome the disorder. However, refractory celiac disease is just that: refractory or stubbornly resistant to treatment. Only a small percentage (1-2%) of the people with celiac disease will develop RCD, and these patients are almost always 50 years of age or older. However, as yet, it is impossible to predict which of the tiny (1.5%) minority of patient of those with celiac disease will develop RCD.

symptoms:
The symptoms of refractory disease are not unlike those of untreated celiac disease except that they are usually more severe and more disabling. The more common symptoms include weight loss, diarrhea, abdominal pain, malnutrition and anemia.
Occasionally, examination of the intestine of an RCD patient, by means of a swallowed, picture taking, camera-like device (intestinal endoscope) reveals evidence of inflammation and ulceration of the middle portion (jejunum) of the small intestine (ulcerative jejunitis). This may be a significant warning that refractory celiac disease may progress to form an enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma (EATL). Thus, there is an intimate link between refractory disease and celiac-associated intestinal lymphoma.

