Refsum Disease

synonyms:
disorder of cornification 11 (phytanic acid type)DOC 11 (phytanic acid type)heredopathia atactica polyneuritiformishereditary sensory and motor neuropathy type 4 (HMSN 4)hypertrophic neuropathy of Refsumphytanic acid storage diseasephytanic acid oxidase deficiencyadult Refsum diseaseclassic Refsum disease

overview:
Summary
Refsum disease is a metabolic disorder characterized by the build-up of a fat (lipid) called phytanic acid in blood plasma and tissues. Individuals with Refsum disease are usually normal at birth, but between the ages of 10 and 20 years old, symptoms begin to develop starting with loss of night vision (retinitis pigmentosa), and eventually including weakness in arms and legs or unsteadiness (cerebellar ataxia). Other common symptoms include a loss of sense of smell (anosmia), rough, scaly skin (ichthyosis) and after many years, deafness.
Treatment for Refsum disease is based on limiting the intake of foods high in phytanic acid. Our bodies cannot make phytanic acid; rather, it is found in foods such as dairy, beef, lamb, and some seafoods. Refsum disease is caused by a change (mutation) in the gene that makes an enzyme responsible for breaking down phytanic acid, a particular type of fatty acid which is derived by bacterial fermentation of green plants or algae. The lack of function of the enzyme (phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase) leads to a build-up of phytanic acid in blood plasma and tissues. The disorder is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
Introduction
Refsum disease is a member of a family of genetic disorders known as leukodystrophies, which result due to errors in lipid metabolism. This error affecting a single process prevents the myelin sheath, the insulating layer that consists of fats and proteins surrounding our nerve cells including those in the eye, from growing or functioning properly.
Refsum disease is sometimes called adult Refsum disease or classic Refsum disease. It was first described by Dr. Sigwald Refsum in 1946. This condition is different from infantile Refsum disease, which has a different cause and is in the group of conditions called Zellweger spectrum disorders (see Related Disorders below) caused by defects in assembling cell sub-compartments called peroxisomes.

symptoms:
At birth, individuals with Refsum disease generally appear normal although they may show shorter bones in the hands and feet (metacarpals and metatarsals, respectively). Between 10 and 20 years old, individuals may show their first symptom which is most frequently the loss of night vision (retinitis pigmentosa). Some people may not show any symptoms until up to 50 years of age. Retinitis pigmentosa occurs because light-sensing cells in the retina, a layer in the back of the eye, gradually deteriorate. The initial loss of night vision usually occurs during childhood, and the progression toward loss of peripheral vision and full blindness may occur over the course of years.
Individuals with Refsum disease often present with retinitis pigmentosa and a combination of other symptoms. Other possible issues in the eye include abnormally small pupils, rapid, involuntary eye movement (nystagmus) and cloudiness in the eye that causes individuals to see starburst-type haloes around bright objects (cataracts). Individuals may experience a loss of their sense of smell and taste (anosmia) and after many years, deafness. Affected individuals also may experience numbness, weakness, a tingling sensation or loss of reflexes in their hands and feet (peripheral polyneuropathy) associated with an unsteady gait (cerebellar ataxia) as they deteriorate. Additionally, individuals with Refsum disease may have rough, scaly patches of skin (ichthyosis) and general weakness throughout the body. Shortening of bones in the hands and feet and abnormal growth plate formation affecting the knees, shoulders and elbows (skeletal dysplasia) may be seen. Although it is rare, if phytanic acid levels become very high in people with Refsum disease, then a cardiac arrhythmia (irregular heartbeat) can occur which could be life threatening.
The type and number of symptoms present in individuals with Refsum disease varies greatly from person to person and the severity depends on the level of phytanic acid in the body. If a person has a greater build-up of phytanic acid, they are expected to show more severe symptoms. The number and severity of symptoms also may increase with age.

