Renal Glycosuria

synonyms:
benign glycosuriafamilial renal glycosurianondiabetic glycosuriaprimary renal glycosuriarenal glucosuria

overview:
Renal (kidney) glycosuria is a rare condition in which too much of the simple sugar glucose is removed through the urine. This happens even though there are normal or low levels of glucose in the blood. When the kidney is working correctly, glucose is only removed into the urine when there is too much in the blood. However, in people with renal glycosuria, glucose is removed in the urine when it should not be because the renal tubules in the kidneys are not working properly. The renal tubules are the part of the kidney that cleans the blood. Most affected people have no symptoms (asymptomatic). When renal glycosuria occurs by itself, the condition can be inherited in an autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive pattern.

symptoms:
In people with renal glycosuria, glucose is removed in the urine even though there are normal or low levels of glucose in the blood. As blood flows through the kidneys, glucose and other substances are cleaned from the liquid portion of the blood. The newly cleaned blood then moves through tubes in the kidneys (renal tubules). Helpful substances, including glucose, sodium, and wate, are reabsorbed and returned to the bloodstream. Unwanted substances are removed from the bloodstream through the urine. When the kidney is working, glucose is only removed into the urine when there is too much sugar in the blood. However, in people with renal glycosuria, extra glucose is removed and/or, the kidney is unable to reabsorb glucose as quickly as it should. (For more, see “Causes” below.)
Most people with renal glycosuria have no obvious symptoms (asymptomatic). Sometimes, glycosuria can cause excess urination (polyuria), extreme thirst
(polydipsia), and other symptoms. Involuntary urination (enuresis) and mild delays in growth and maturation during puberty have been reported in rare cases. When a person with renal glycosuria is pregnant or starving, this may cause low levels of fluid in the body (dehydration). It can also cause a tissue build-up of certain chemical substances (ketone bodies). Fluids also build up due to too much breakdown of fats (ketosis).

