Renal Medullary Carcinoma

synonyms:
RMCmedullary carcinoma of the kidneykidney medullary carcinomarenal cell carcinoma, unclassified, with medullary phenotypeRCCU-MPmedullary renal cell carcinoma

overview:
Summary
Renal medullary carcinoma, also known as RMC, is a rare cancer of the kidney that predominantly afflicts young people of African descent who carry the sickle cell trait, sickle cell disease or other sickle hemoglobinopathies that can cause sickling of the red blood cells. Renal cell carcinoma, unclassified with medullary phenotype (RCCU-MP) is a very rare subtype of RMC that occurs in people who do not carry any sickle hemoglobinopathies. All RMC and RCCU-MP tumors characteristically do not express a protein called INI1, also known as SMARCB1, hSNF5 or BAF47. Most patients with RMC are young and the cancer will most often have spread to the lymph nodes or other organs by the time it is diagnosed. RMC is twice more likely to occur in men than women, and in the right kidney compared with the left. The most common symptoms are blood in the urine and pain on the kidney side. RMC is treated with chemotherapy, surgery (when feasible) and sometimes radiation therapy. The exact cause of RMC is not fully understood.
Introduction
RMC was originally described in 1995 and is one of the most aggressive kidney cancers. Half of the patients with RMC described in the original 1995 study did not survive longer than 4 months from diagnosis. With current therapies this has improved to 13 months and research is underway to find new and better treatments. RMC can be easier to treat if diagnosed early. Therefore, young black individuals (particularly those who are known to carry the sickle cell trait or sickle cell disease) should immediately contact their healthcare provider if they experience symptoms that can suggest RMC. By the time it is diagnosed, RMC will have spread to the lymph nodes or other organs in more than 90% of patients. If left untreated, RMC can quickly spread to the lymph nodes or other organs even in those patients who initially have RMC contained within the kidney. RMC most commonly spreads to the lymph nodes (85% of patients), lungs (46%), liver (15%) and bone (15%), but almost never spreads to the brain.

symptoms:
The most common first sign of RMC is blood in the urine (hematuria) and patients may also feel pain in their flank around the kidney area or (less commonly) feel a mass in their abdomen, usually on the right side. About half of the patients with RMC will begin losing weight unintentionally and may develop fevers and night sweats.

