Restless Legs Syndrome

overview:
Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is a neurologic and sleep related movement disorder characterized by an irresistible urge to move in the legs that typically occurs or worsens at rest. It is usually accompanied by abnormal, uncomfortable sensations, known as paresthesias or dysesthesias, that are often likened to crawling, cramping, aching, burning, itching, or prickling deep within the affected areas. Although the legs are usually involved, an urge to move with paresthesias or dysesthesias may also sometimes affect the arms or other areas of the body. Those with RLS may vigorously move the affected area, engage in pacing, or perform other, often repetitive movements, such as stretching, bending, or rocking. Symptoms typically worsen in the evening or at night, often resulting in sleep disturbances. Some individuals with RLS may also develop symptoms during other extended periods of inactivity, such as while sitting in a movie theater or traveling in a car. RLS may occur as a primary condition or due to another underlying disorder, certain medications, or other factors (secondary or symptomatic RLS). In primary RLS, the disorder is often genetic in origin or occurs for unknown reasons (idiopathic). Secondary RLS may occur in association with certain conditions, such as iron deficiency, low levels of the oxygen-carrying component of red blood cells (anemia), kidney failure, or pregnancy.

symptoms:
In individuals with restless legs syndrome (RLS), symptoms may become apparent at any age, including childhood. In most cases, the disorder is chronic in nature, sometimes becoming more severe with increasing age. However, in some affected individuals, RLS symptoms may periodically subside and recur with varying levels of severity.
Because RLS symptoms typically occur upon relaxation and inactivity, many with the disorder may have problems falling asleep and/or may often be awakened by symptoms. In addition, the irresistible urge to move often causes affected individuals to get out of bed and walk around or perform other movements, further disrupting the opportunity for restful (restorative) sleep. In some cases, those with severe symptoms may only be able to obtain a few hours of sleep on a nightly basis, resulting in excessive daytime sleepiness.
In many cases, individuals with RLS may also experience repetitive movements of the legs during sleep (periodic limb movements in sleep [PLMS]) in which there is bending of the ankle (i.e., dorsiflexion), extension of the big toe, and, often, associated bending (flexion) of the knee or hip. PLMS tends to occur during non-dreaming periods of sleep (non-REM sleep) and is defined as five or more periodic limb movements per hour. In those with RLS, PLMS may contribute to sleep difficulties.
Some individuals with severe RLS may also experience abnormal, involuntary (dyskinetic) movements while awake that may be characterized by sudden, rapid muscle jerks or more prolonged uncontrolled movements of certain muscles or muscle groups. Although the legs are usually affected, the arms may also be involved in some cases. These involuntary movements, which may appear similar to PLMS, typically cease upon the performance of voluntary movements.

