Retinal Vasculopathy with Cerebral Leukoencephalopathy and Systemic Manifestations

synonyms:
RVCL-Scerebroretinal vasculopathy (CRV)hereditary endotheliopathy, retinopathy, nephropathy and stroke (HERNS)hereditary vascular retinopathy (HVR)hereditary systemic angiopathy (HSA)retinal vasculopathy with cerebral leukodystrophy (RVCL)TREX1 vasculopathy

overview:
Summary

Retinal vasculopathy with cerebral leukoencephalopathy (pronounced: looko-encefa-LA-pathee) and systemic manifestations (RVCL-S) is a rare genetic disease that causes progressive loss of tiny blood vessels, ultimately resulting in visual deterioration and a series of mini-strokes in the brain. The initial symptoms of visual disturbance often begin in middle age years (35 to 50 years of age). Usually there also are mild clinical changes seen in the liver and kidneys. Patients with RVCL have a shortened lifespan and usually have a life expectancy in the range of 5-20 years after onset of symptoms. The gene responsible for causing RVCL-S, calledTREX1, codes for the protein of the same name whose two primary functions are to repair DNA and to control a specific kind of sugar machinery within cells. A mutation in ~25% of theTREX1gene produces a shortened version of the protein that mislocalizes inside cells and in middle age leads to development of RVCL-S. The disease is an autosomal dominant disorder, so one copy of an abnormalTREX1gene leads to the disease even though the other copy is normal. Diagnosis can be conclusively established by genetic testing of theTREX1gene. Because of its rarity, this disease is often misdiagnosed as a brain tumor, multiple sclerosis, vasculitis or disease of unknown origin. This may lead to unnecessary and often hazardous diagnostic procedures such as multiple biopsies of the brain. Currently, there is no established preventative therapy. Nevertheless, a phase II clinical trial is currently underway using an antibody drug that is already FDA-approved for another rare disease that affects small blood vessels.

Introduction

In 1988, physicians at Washington University School of Medicine in Saint Louis, Missouri described a large family having a unique type of genetic disorder that particularly damaged parts of the brain including the eyes during adult middle years. They called this syndrome cerebroretinal vasculopathy (CRV) [1]. In particular, deterioration of small blood vessels (the microvasculature) in the retina (back of the eye) was the predominant cause of the vision loss. Additionally, brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed the family suffered from mini strokes in a part of the brain called the “white matter.” In this American-Caucasian family of Northern European extraction, eight afflicted patients spanning three generations were identified. An unrelated Ashkenazi-Jewish family with the same set of symptoms and pathologic findings was reported a year later [1,2]. Since then, a total of approximately 43 unrelated families have been identified with 17 (~ 40%) of these unrelated families having the same mutation (called V235Gfs*6) [3,4, and Liszewski M.K. and Atkinson, J.P., unpublished].
In 1997, Dr. Joanna Jen (currently at Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY) described a family of Chinese descent (Taiwan) that could trace similar disease symptoms back three generations [5]. She named the disease HERNS (hereditary endotheliopathy with retinopathy, nephropathy and stroke). In 1990 and 1998 Dutch researchers published a report of a family with a similar disease, but with a history of migraine headaches [6]. They called the disease HVR (hereditary vascular retinopathy).
In 2007, these researchers entered a collaboration that conclusively proved through modern day genetics that CRV, HERNS and HVR are the same disease. The name was changed to RVCL [7]. All affected members of RVCL families had mutations in the one region of the geneTREX1. Since then, several additional scientific reports have described other patients with mutations that all localize to the same region of TREX1 [4,8-10].
It is important to note that there are several different diseases that are caused by mutations in other areas of theTREX1gene [9]. However, the mutations that cause RVCL originate only in one specific segment ofTREX1.
TREX1 is an important protein in the body. It serves as both a DNA repair enzyme and also metabolizes damaged DNA. As a DNA-degrading enzyme, it cleans up and digests DNA debris that is generated when tissue is damaged, or cells die and regenerate. TREX1 is also important for eliminating DNA derived from viruses that invade and infect human cells.
In 2016, collaborators from around the world prepared a comprehensive report analyzing clinical features on 78 patients from 11 unrelated families and renamed the disease to RVCL-S [3].
In 2018, researchers focused on identifying and characterizing TREX1 protein in the brain [11]. They found that TREX1 was localized to a specialized subset of cells (called microglia) and that TREX1 levels increased in brain areas affected by loss of blood vessels. TREX1 is also expressed in many other cell types, but at lower levels that are important, but more difficult to detect. Future studies clarifying the relationship of TREX1, its role in specific cell types and how TREX1 regulates the health of small blood, vessels may lead to new treatment strategies.
Studies of the natural history of this disease, which help to characterize the typical disease course, have been a critical step to improve the design of clinical trials [12]. Understanding the natural progression of RVCL-S helps physicians and researchers design better studies to test whether medications are effective at slowing disease progression.

symptoms:
Hallmark symptoms of RVCL-S usually begin in middle age (~35-50 years) with eye issues such as an increasing number of “floaters” and “blind spots.” The main pathologic process of RVCL-S is that small blood vessels prematurely drop out; that is, deteriorate and disappear [3]. This leads to mini strokes (or “micro-infarcts”) in tissues. The loss of blood supply affects both the eye (retina) and the brain (white matter) since these organs serve key functions and are sensitive to even small disruptions in blood flow. As more vessels drop out, there is development of increased vision loss and larger brain infarcts (or tumor-like lesions), especially if the mini-strokes are clustered.
Another study found systemic manifestations of the disease as well [3]. In a report detailing 11 unrelated families, five different mutations in theTREX1gene were identified. Disease-related findings were similar across all mutations and families including visual loss, brain disease producing stroke-like symptoms, mental impairment, migraine, psychiatric disturbances and seizures. Additional systemic features included liver and kidney disease, anemia, high blood pressure and, less commonly, Raynaud’s phenomenon and intestinal bleeding. These features likely arise primarily because small blood vessels progressively deteriorate in the organs (e.g., liver, kidney, skin, intestine). Some RVCL-S patients also develop thyroid disease (hypothyroidism) or bone problems caused by loss of small blood vessels (osteonecrosis).
Because RVCL-S is so rare and only recently recognized, it is often misdiagnosed as a severe type of multiple sclerosis, diabetic retinopathy, brain tumor or vasculitis (inflammation of blood vessels).
The correct diagnosis can be definitively made to conclusively establish if the patient has the disease by genetic testing for mutations in the TREX1 gene on a small blood sample. However, prior to obtaining genetic testing, consultation with a genetic counselor who is familiar with RVCL-S is recommended.
Research studies are currently being conducted at the RVCL Research Centers at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis and the University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine in Philadelphia. These are open to adults who have been genetically tested and shown to have a RVCL-S mutation.

