Retinitis Pigmentosa

synonyms:
progressive pigmentary retinopathyrod-cone dystrophyRP

overview:
Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) comprises a large group of inherited vision disorders that cause progressive degeneration of the retina (the so-called inherited retinal diseases, or IRDs), the light sensitive membrane that coats the inside of the eyes. Peripheral (or side) vision gradually decreases and eventually is lost in most patients. Central vision is usually preserved until late in these conditions. Some forms of RP can be associated with deafness, obesity, kidney disease and various other general health problems, including central nervous system and metabolic disorders and occasionally chromosomal abnormalities.

symptoms:
RP usually begins as night or dim light visual impairment (that is, difficulty seeing in dimly lit environments or at dusk, or adapting to, or recovering function in, dim light after being in bright light for any length of time). Typically, this is followed by the affected individual’s growing awareness of a loss of peripheral vision. Symptoms are more often noticed between the age 10 and 40, but earlier and later onset forms of RP exist. Characteristically, symptoms develop gradually over time. The sudden onset of these same symptoms should point to a different cause, such as an autoimmune process. Older people with sudden onset of these symptoms are especially at risk for experiencing them as the result of having cancer (so called paraneoplastic retinopathy, which often co-occurs with an optic nerve involvement as well).
The rate and extent of progression of visual loss in RP can vary. The way that peripheral vision is lost in RP has been especially well characterized by various authors. It has been reported in various studies that the most variable aspect is the age of onset of the symptoms. This can vary not only between families and between subtypes of RP, but also within families. However, after that, the rate and modality of progression tends to follow a fairly predictable and stereotyped exponential pattern. This pattern signifies that, during the first decade of symptomatic disease patients experience a slower rate of disease progression, which then accelerates during the subsequent two decades, to slow again during the remainder of life. When other members of a family are affected, the rates of progression are often similar within that family, but some degree of variability exists in this aspect of RP too.
Some patients with RP or related disorders present with complex manifestations affecting other organs, termed “syndromes”. The most common associations of RP with general health (so called “systemic”) problems causing these more complex syndromes are hearing loss and obesity, and are reviewed under the “Related Syndromes” section of this review.

