Retinoblastoma

overview:
Retinoblastoma is an extremely rare malignant tumor that develops in the nerve-rich layers that line the back of the eyes (retina). The retina is a thin layer of nerve cells that senses light and converts it into nerve signals, which are then relayed to the brain through the optic nerve. Retinoblastoma is most commonly diagnosed in children under the age of three. The most typical finding associated with retinoblastoma is the reflection of light off a tumor behind the lens of the eye, which causes the pupil to appear white, the so-called “cat’s eye reflex” (leukocoria). In addition, the eyes may be misaligned so that they appear crossed (strabismus). In some affected children, the eye(s) may become red and/or painful. The presence of a retinoblastoma may cause glaucoma, a condition marked by a rise in the pressure within the eyeball that prevents the normal drainage of fluid from the eye and potentially causes characteristic damage to the optic nerve. Retinoblastoma may affect one eye (unilateral) or both eyes (bilateral). Retinoblastomas occur in two forms – heritable and non-heritable. Bilateral forms are heritable and usually diagnosed at a younger age. In most affected children, retinoblastoma is non-heritable; it occurs spontaneously for no apparent reason.

symptoms:
In approximately 60 percent of children, the presenting sign of retinoblastoma is leukocoria. Initially, leukocoria may only be detectable at certain angles or under certain light conditions. Leukocoria is often seen on flash photography. Leukocoria can be caused by conditions other than retinoblastoma. The detection of leukocoria warrants an immediate evaluation by an eye specialist (ophthalmologist).
Another common initial sign of a retinoblastoma is misalignment of the eyes in which they often appear crossed (strabismus). Strabismus may develop before or at the same time as leukocoria. Other signs are a red, inflamed eye(s) or repetitive, uncontrolled movements of the eyes (nystagmus). Less often, symptoms may include differences in pupil size (anisocoria), differences in pupil color (heterochromia), enlargement of the eyeball (buphthalmos), protrusion or ‘bulging’ of the eyeball (exophthalmos), decreased vision, inflammation of the soft tissues of the eye socket (orbital cellulitis), or ocular inflammation (uveitis), an inflammation of the middle layer of the eye called the uvea.
Some infants may have vitreous hemorrhage, which is a leakage of blood near the vitreous of the eye. The vitreous is a clear, jelly-like fluid that fills the middle of the eye. Vitreous hemorrhage can cause vision loss. Some affected children may exhibit pooling or accumulation of blood in the space between the cornea and the iris of the eyes. This is called hyphema and the blood can cover most or all of the iris and the pupil, partially or completely blocking an infant’s vision. Hyphema is painful. Additional symptoms include clouding of the lenses of the eyes (cataract) or elevated fluid pressure within the eye preventing the normal outflow of fluid from the eye and potentially causing damage to the optic nerve (glaucoma). Pain in the eye can also occur, especially when glaucoma is present.
In two-thirds of children, only one eye is affected (unilateral). When both eyes are affected, the tumors usually develop simultaneously. In some instances, children with a tumor in one eye will develop a tumor in the unaffected eye later in life. In most children, retinoblastoma only affects the eye and does not spread to surrounding tissue. However, if a retinoblastoma is not detected early, the tumor may spread to affect the tissue surrounding the eye or other parts of the body such as the central nervous system, lymph nodes, skeleton, or lung. This is known as extraocular or metastatic retinoblastoma. Signs and symptoms of metastatic disease include unintended weight loss, vomiting, headaches, and neurological impairment.
Some infants and children develop retinoblastoma in the brain as well as the eye. The most common additional tumor, a pinealoblastoma, may form in the pineal gland. This condition is called trilateral retinoblastoma. Trilateral retinoblastoma develops in less than 5% of individuals with bilateral or heritable retinoblastoma. It is even rarer in unilateral or non-heritable retinoblastoma.

