Retinoschisis

synonyms:
Congenital Retinal CystCongenital Vascular Veils in the RetinaGiant Cyst of the RetinaVitreoretinal Dystrophy

overview:
Retinoschisis means splitting of the eye’s retina into two layers. There are two forms of this disorder. The most common is an acquired form that affects both men and women. It usually occurs in middle age or beyond, although it can occur earlier, and it is sometimes known as senile retinoschisis. The other form is present at birth (congenital) and affects mostly boys and young men. It is known as juvenile, X-linked retinoschisis.
The disorder is characterized by a slow, progressive loss of parts of the field of vision corresponding to the areas of the retina that have become split. Either form may be associated with the development of saclike blisters (cysts) in the retina.

symptoms:
Retinoschisis is characterized by a reduction in visual acuity.  There may also be a loss of peripheral vision.   Very few people become totally blind from either form of the disorder, but some men with the juvenile form may ultimately have very poor vision.
Decreased visual acuity is directly linked to the formation of small cysts that damage the nerves in the retina.  Prescribing eyeglasses cannot correct for the vision loss caused by such nerve damage.  Peripheral vision is affected by the split of the retina into two layers, an inner layer of nerve cells and an outer layer of other cells.
Usually, and almost always with the juvenile form, both eyes are affected (bilateral).  The juvenile form is the more serious form of retinoschisis.  The acquired form may occur without symptoms (asymptomatic).
This disorder may lead to retinal detachment.  The retinal split often extends back over the area near the center of the visual field (macula).  If a break develops in both the front and the back layers of the retina, a true retinal detachment may occur causing loss of parts of the field of vision.  A completely blind area (scotoma) with a sharp edge in the area where splitting (schisis) occurs is evident in the patient’s visual field.

