Retroperitoneal Fibrosis

synonyms:
Idiopathic Retroperitoneal FibrosisOrmond's Disease

overview:
Retroperitoneal fibrosis is a rare inflammatory disorder in which abnormal formation of fiber-like tissue (fibrosis) occurs behind the membrane that lines the cavity of the abdomen (peritoneum). This abnormal tissue growth often spreads to affect the tubes that carry urine from the kidney to the bladder (ureters). Often these tubes become blocked by the excess tissue. Specific symptoms may vary depending upon the exact location of tissue growth and how far it spreads. In most cases the cause of this disorder is unknown (idiopathic).

symptoms:
The most common symptom of retroperitoneal fibrosis is pain in the lower back or abdomen. In many cases this pain is dull, vague and difficult to localize. Additional symptoms may be weight loss, fever, nausea, a low level of circulating red blood cells (anemia), and loss of appetite. Impaired movement of a limb may occur intermittently and abnormal yellow discoloration (pigmentation) of the skin and the whites of the eyes (jaundice) may be present. Swelling of one leg may also occur. Reduced blood flow to the leg may cause pain and discoloration.
Occasionally there may be bleeding (hemorrhaging) in the stomach and intestine. In about ten percent of the cases there may be difficulty urinating. Upon examination by a physician, a mass can be felt in the rectum or abdomen in about 15 percent of individuals with this disorder. In some cases, obstruction of one or both of the tubes that carries urine from the kidney into the bladder (ureters) may also occur (unilateral or bilateral obstructive uropathy). This results in the blockage of the flow of urine and the abnormal accumulation of urine.
Depending upon where the obstruction occurs, the accumulation of urine may result in the pelvis and kidney duct becoming swollen with urine (hydronephrosis). High blood pressure (hypertension) and, eventually, kidney (renal) failure may also occur. Symptoms of renal failure include nausea and vomiting.
In rare cases, retroperitoneal fibrosis may become malignant. In some affected individuals the largest vein in the body that returns blood to the heart (inferior vena cava) may be encased by the fibrous tissue. This encasement rarely causes obstruction of the vein.

