Rett Syndrome

synonyms:
classic Rett syndromeRTTvariant (atypical) Rett syndrome

overview:
Summary
Rett syndrome is a progressive neurodevelopmental disorder that almost exclusively affects females. Only in rare cases are males affected. Infants with Rett syndrome generally develop normally for about 7 to 18 months after birth. At this point, they lose previously acquired skills (developmental regression) such as purposeful hand movements and the ability to communicate. Additional abnormalities occur including impaired control of voluntary movements (ataxia) and the development of distinctive, uncontrolled hand movements such as hand clapping or rubbing. Some children also have slowing of head growth (acquired microcephaly), Affected children often develop autistic-like behaviors, breathing irregularities, feeding and swallowing difficulties, growth retardation, and seizures. Most Rett syndrome cases are caused by identifiable mutations of theMECP2gene on the X chromosome and can present with a wide range of disability ranging from mild to severe. The course and severity of Rett syndrome is determined by the location, type and severity of theMECP2mutation and the process of random X-inactivation (see Causes section below). Therefore, two girls of the same age with the same mutation can appear significantly different.
Introduction
Rett syndrome was first described in the medical literature by an Austrian physician named Andreas Rett in 1960s. Many researchers now consider Rett syndrome as part of a spectrum of disease relating to mutations of theMECP2gene. This spectrum, sometimes referred to as MECP2-related disorders, includes classic Rett syndrome, variant Rett syndrome, MECP2-related severe neonatal encephalopathy, and PPM-X syndrome. Another disorder, MECP2  duplication syndrome, has recently been described in the medical literature. This disorder is caused by duplicated material involving theMECP2gene on the X chromosome.

symptoms:
The symptoms, progression, and severity of Rett syndrome can vary dramatically from one person to another. The disorder primarily affects females and most likely represents a spectrum of disease associated with mutations of theMECP2gene. A wide range of disability can potentially be associated with Rett syndrome. Symptoms generally appear in stages. It is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
CLASSIC RETT SYNDROMEAffected infants are generally described as having normal development until approximately 6 to 18 months of age. However, researchers have noted that affected infants are often described as being very placid and having a poor sucking ability and a weak cry. Low muscle tone (hypotonia) is also common before 6 months of age. Head growth can slow down as early as 3 months of age. Slow head growth can result in acquired microcephaly, a condition characterized by head circumference that is smaller than would normally be expected for age and gender.
Between 6 and 18 months of age, affected girls may enter a period of developmental stagnation. Loss of eye contact and a lack of interest in play or games may also occur. Infants may demand little to no attention from their parents. Irritability, crying and restlessness may be seen. In some cases, development may continue but at a delayed rate. For example, an infant may learn to sit upright, but not to crawl.
After this period, approximately between 1-4 years of age, affected individuals begin to lose previously acquired skills, specifically spoken language skills and hand skills. Some individuals may lose the ability to interact socially. Affected people may also exhibit a decline in intellectual function. This deterioration can be rapid or gradual. Parents may notice a sudden change in their child’s behavior and health. Affected children may show diminished interest in people and objects.
During this time period, the loss of ability to make purposeful hand and finger movements occurs. Affected people then exhibit a characteristic finding of Rett syndrome, the development of stereotypic hand movements including hand wringing or squeezing, clapping, rubbing, washing, or hand to mouth movements. Screaming fits and inconsolable crying may also occur.
Additional symptoms may develop including autistic-like features, panic attacks, teeth grinding (bruxism), tremors and apraxia. Apraxia is a condition characterized by the inability to perform learned (familiar) movements on command, even though the command is understood and there is a willingness to perform the movement. Apraxia can affect movement but also communication skills. Seizures are common during this period in individuals with Rett syndrome. Some individuals may experience balance issues due to problems coordinating voluntary muscles of the legs (gait ataxia). Disordered breathing patterns that occur when a child is awake such as hypoventilation or hyperventilation have also been reported. Affected people may also exhibit forced expulsion of air and saliva, swallowing air (aerophagia), temporary stopping (cessation) of breathing (apnea), and holding of one’s breath. Breathing problems tend to worsen with stress.
After this period of rapid deterioration, neurological features stabilize. Some affected individuals may even show slight improvement with eye contact, communication skills, regression of autistic traits, and overall improvement with behavior and social interactions.
However, many issues remain including characteristic hand movements, seizures, teeth grinding (bruxism), and breathing irregularities. Intellectual disability in Rett syndrome is difficult to access because of the inability to speak or use hands. Eventually, after 10 years of age, affected individuals may exhibit late motor impairment. Some people with classic Rett syndrome may never be able to walk. Others may lose the ability to walk. They may also experience increasing muscle weakness, joint contractures, and spasticity, a condition characterize by involuntary muscles spasms that result in slow, stiff movements of the legs. Affected people may have underdeveloped (hypotrophic) hands and feet that are frequently cold. Most affected individuals may develop dystonia, a condition characterized by sustained muscle contractions associated with abnormal, uncontrolled movements and postures. Some affected people may develop symptoms similar to those seen in Parkinson’s disease (parkinsonism), such as a decreased expression in face (hypomimia), rigidity, and tremor.
Approximately 85-90% of affected people may experience growth failure and muscle wasting that worsens with age. These symptoms are due, in part, to difficulties with chewing and swallowing, which leads to poor food intake. On the other hand, some people with Rett syndrome, especially those with more retained function, may have excessive food intake and become obese.
A variety of additional symptoms and physical findings can occur in people with classic Rett syndrome including gastrointestinal abnormalities such as abnormal muscle contractions or dysfunction of nerves of the bowel (bowel dysmotility), constipation, gastroesophageal reflux, and abnormal widening (dilation) of the colon (functional megacolon); cold hands and feet (vasomotor abnormalities); intermittent crossed eyes (esotropia); varying degrees of side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis); and gallbladder dysfunction and gallstones, which have been show to occur with greater frequency in individuals with Rett syndrome than in the general population. Some people with Rett syndrome develop osteopenia, a condition characterized by decreased bone mineralization and bone loss. Osteopenia can result in weak, fragile bones.
Many people with Rett syndrome live well into adulthood, although they may require constant care and supervision. However, there is an increased risk of sudden death in people with Rett syndrome. Approximately one quarter of deaths in Rett are sudden and unexpected. This may be due, in part, to heart irregularities, specifically a prolonged QT interval and T-wave abnormalities. The functioning of the heart is controlled by electrical nerve impulses that regulate normal rhythmic pumping activity of the heart muscle. After each heartbeat, this electrical system recharges, a process known as repolarization. During electrical stimulation, the heart muscle contracts, a process known as depolarization. The QT interval measures the amount of time required for these two processes to occur. When the QT interval is longer than normal (prolonged), the heartbeat may become irregular.
VARIANT RETT SYNDROMEVariant Rett syndrome refers to people who have atypical cases or presentations of Rett syndrome. These cases may also be known as atypical Rett syndrome. These forms of Rett syndrome include:
The preserved speech variant of Rett syndrome (Zappella variant) is characterized by the symptoms of classic Rett syndrome, but with the recovery of some language and motor skills. Mutations of theMECP2gene have been found in the majority of cases. Head size is often normal in the Zapella variant, and people with this variant may be obese, more aggressive, and have more autistic features.
The late childhood regression form is characterized by later and more gradual regression of motor and language skills than is found in classic Rett syndrome. Affected females have a normal head circumference.
Some affected individuals have a form that is associated with seizures that occur before 6 months of age (Hanefeld variant). This variant form is rarely associated with mutations of theMECP2gene, but rather another gene known asCDKL5. For more information onCDKL5see the Related Disorders section below.
A form known as the congenital variant of Rett syndrome (Rolando variant) is characterized loss of muscle tone and severe developmental delays during the first few months of life. This form is rarely associated with mutations in theMECP2gene. Many children with this variant form of Rett syndrome have been shown to have mutations of theFOXG1gene. For more information onFOXG1see the Related Disorders section below.
The ‘forme fruste’ variant of Rett syndrome is characterized by an overall milder expression than is seen in classic Rett syndrome. The clinical course is shorter (protracted) and incomplete. Regression occurs later than it does in the classic form. Affected individuals may retain hand use and the stereotypic hand movements of Rett syndrome may be mild.
In rare cases, some girls with MECP2 mutations may only have mild learning disabilities or autistic features. Without regression of hand skills and language and the development of the characteristic repetitive hand stereotypies, these children should not be considered to have Rett syndrome as the prognosis is different for these people compared to people who have the characteristic features of Rett.
ADDITIONALMECP2– RELATED DISORDERSIn rare cases, males can develop distinct symptoms associated with a mutation of theMECP2gene.
Some males withMECP2mutations develop brain dysfunction during infancy (neonatal encephalopathy). Affected males may also exhibit microcephaly. The disorder is progressive resulting in abnormal muscle tone, involuntary movements, severe seizures and breathing irregularities. The brain dysfunction is often severe and the disorder can be fatal by 2 years of age.
Some individuals withMECP2mutations develop X-linked intellectual disability. Affected females may have mild, non-progressive intellectual disability. Affected males may develop mild to severe intellectual disability including a disorder known as PPM-X syndrome. This acronym stands for manic depressive (p)sychosis, (p)yramidal signs, (p)arkinsonism, and (m)acro-orchidism. Affected individuals may have psychotic disorders such as bipolar disorder. Additional symptoms include parkinsonism, increased muscle tone and exaggerated reflexes. Abnormal enlargement of the testes (macro-orchidism) may also occur.
Some girls with a diagnosis of autism have been shown to have mutations in theMECP2gene.

