Reye Syndrome

synonyms:
fatty liver with encephalopathyReye's syndromeRS

overview:
Reye syndrome is a rare disorder of childhood and adolescence. It primarily affects individuals under 18 years of age, particularly children from approximately age four to 12 years. In rare cases, infants or young adults may be affected. The disorder’s cause is unknown. However, there appears to be an association between the onset of Reye syndrome and the use of aspirin-containing medications (salicylates) in children or adolescents with certain viral illnesses, particularly upper respiratory tract infections (e.g., influenza B) or, in some cases, chickenpox (varicella). Although any organ system may be involved, Reye syndrome is primarily characterized by distinctive, fatty changes of the liver and sudden (acute) swelling of the brain (cerebral edema). Associated symptoms and findings may include the sudden onset of severe, persistent vomiting; elevated levels of certain liver enzymes in the blood (hepatic transaminases); unusually high amounts of ammonia in the blood (hyperammonemia); disturbances of consciousness; sudden episodes of uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain (seizures); and/or other abnormalities, leading to potentially life-threatening complications in some cases. Due to the potential association between the use of aspirin-containing agents and the development of Reye syndrome, it is advised that such medications be avoided for individuals under age 18 years who are affected by viral infections such as influenza or chickenpox.

symptoms:
The symptoms of Reye syndrome typically begin after a viral illness, particularly an upper respiratory infection (e.g, with influenza B virus) or, in some cases, chickenpox (varicella). Less commonly, Reye syndrome may develop after infection with other viral agents, such as influenza A or rubella. (For further information, please see the “Causes” section of this report below.)
About three to five days after the onset of viral infection, affected children experience sudden, persistent, uncontrolled vomiting. Disturbances of consciousness may begin simultaneously or develop within hours. Such abnormalities often include irritability, restlessness, disorientation, lethargy, and memory impairment. Some children may remain lethargic with no progression to unconsciousness. In other cases, neurological deterioration may be rapidly progressive, leading to an apparent lack of awareness of surroundings (stupor); a state of unconsciousness and unresponsiveness (coma); widening (dilation) of the pupils (mydriasis); rapid, shallow breathing (tachypnea); a rapid heart rate (tachycardia); and loss of certain reflexes (e.g., deep tendon, pupillary, oculocephalic). Severe neurological dysfunction may also lead to episodes of uncontrolled electrical disturbances in the brain (seizures); abnormal posturing (decerebrate or decorticate rigidity), indicating damage to certain areas of the brain; and potentially life-threatening complications.
Findings associated with fatty degeneration of the liver may include enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly) and abnormally increased levels of certain liver enzymes (hepatic transaminases), indicating impaired liver functioning. However, jaundice, a finding often associated with liver dysfunction, generally does not occur (anicteric) or is minimal in those with the disorder. Jaundice is a condition in which there is yellowish discoloration of the skin, eyes, and mucous membranes due to excessive accumulation of the pigment bilirubin in the blood.
In individuals with Reye syndrome, disease severity may be extremely variable. According to reports in the medical literature, some affected individuals may have mild symptoms without disease progression. However, as discussed above, others with the disorder may develop rapid neurological deterioration leading to potentially life-threatening complications. Researchers have proposed a clinical staging system based upon the varying levels of severity, with Grades I, II, and III indicating relatively mild to moderate disease and Grades IV and V signifying more severe disease.

