Rheumatic Fever

synonyms:
Acute Rheumatic FeverInflammatory RheumatismRheumatic Arthritis

overview:
Rheumatic fever is an inflammatory disease that is rare in the United States but common in some other parts of the world. It primarily affects children between the ages of 6 and 16, and develops after an infection with streptococcal bacteria, such as strep throat or scarlet fever. About 5% of those with untreated strep infection will develop rheumatic fever.
Rheumatic fever may affect the heart, joints, nervous system and/or skin. In more than half of all cases, it leads to serious inflammatory disease of the valves of the heart. Joint disease is the second most common consequence of rheumatic fever.

symptoms:
The streptococcal infection that precedes rheumatic fever may or may not be noticeable as a sore throat.  After a latent period of two or three weeks, the patient may develop symptoms of rheumatic fever.  The most common symptoms are: sore throat; swollen, red tonsils; fever; headache; and joint and muscle aches, especially in the knees.
The most serious problem that can be caused by rheumatic fever is rheumatic heart disease. The membranes lining the heart chambers may be inflamed (endocarditis), the muscle walls of the heart may be inflamed (myocarditis), the membrane surrounding the heart may be inflamed (pericarditis), or any combination of these symptoms may occur.  A heart murmur not previously present, enlargement of the heart (cardiomegaly), congestive heart failure, and pericardial friction rubs or leakage of blood from vessels into heart tissue may be signs of rheumatic carditis. Inflammation and subsequent scarring of heart valves occurs in patients with this disorder, and can lead to heart function abnormalities.
If the disorder affects the nervous system the patient may present with abrupt, non-repetitive limb movements and grimaces (Sydenham’s chorea) that typically become apparent within a couple of months after the initial streptococcal infection.  Such symptoms may disappear after a few weeks or months.
If the disorder affects connective tissue or the autoimmune system, painless, firm, round lumps underneath the skin (subcutaneous nodules) may develop over bones and near joints.  The nodules rarely last for more than a month.  However, the associated arthritis may last for some time.
Heart inflammation (carditis), chorea and arthritis are complications of rheumatic fever that can occur singly or in combination.  Subcutaneous nodules and a typical rash (erythema marginatum) are rarely seen without carditis.  Moderate fever, a general feeling of discomfort (malaise), and fatigue usually occur, especially when carditis is present.

