Rhizomelic Chondrodysplasia Punctata

synonyms:
RCDP

overview:
Summary
Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP) is a rare disorder associated with a deficiency of ether-type lipids called plasmalogens that affect the development of many parts of the body. RCDP is characterized by disproportionately short stature which is most noticeable in the upper arms and legs (rhizomelia). Individuals with RCDP often have limited or decreased movement of their joints (contractures). They have distinctive facial features which may include prominence of the forehead, widely set eyes and underdevelopment of the middle of the face. Other clinical features include intellectual impairment, clouding of the lenses of the eyes (cataracts), seizures, heart defects and respiratory concerns.
Introduction
RCDP is in a group of peroxisomal disorders characterized by the failure of the peroxisomes to function properly and produce plasmalogens. Peroxisomes are small sacs in the gel-like fluid (cytoplasm) of cells that play a vital role in numerous biochemical processes in the body. Peroxisomes help with the breakdown of fats and formation of different molecules such as plasmalogen. Deficiency of plasmalogen affects bone growth, red blood cells and nerves.
RCDP is caused by changes (variants) in genes that affect the production of plasmalogens. Currently, there are 5 types of RCDP that are classified based on the associated genes. The most common type is RCDP1 which is caused by variants in thePEX7gene. Regardless of type or gene involved, all 5 types of RCDP are due to impairment in the peroxisomal steps of plasmalogen biosynthesis. Inheritance is autosomal recessive.
RCDP is a complex medical condition and when first discovered more than 50 years ago, children with this condition often did not survive beyond infancy or early childhood. Those who did survive had significant physical disabilities and cognitive impairment. Now, due to the availability of patient registries and patient organizations, as well as early diagnosis and management, individuals with this condition are living longer. Several resources about RCDP are currently available to assist families (listed below).

symptoms:
RCDP1 is the most common and best understood type. However, RCDP regardless of type may be categorized as “classic” which has more severe features and lower plasmalogen levels or “nonclassic” which has relatively mild features and higher plasmalogen levels.
Classic (severe) RCDP1
Affected individuals often have significant lung disease requiring long-term oxygen use and have frequent lung infections. Individuals also have skeletal and joint abnormalities including shortened arm and leg bones, tight joints (contractures) and narrowing of the spinal canal (spinal stenosis). These abnormalities may make it difficult or impossible to walk and may cause pinching of the spinal cord resulting in pain, tingling, weakness or poor bladder control. Vision is also affected, and most children are diagnosed with cataracts in the first six months of life. Facial features typical of RCDP include an upturned nose, underdevelopment of the midface and widely set eyes. Baby teeth may appear late and recurrent ear infections may occur thus increasing the risk of hearing loss. These children are likely to fall behind on growth curves compared to unaffected children due to feeding difficulties. People with RCDP have intellectual disability and may develop seizures ranging in type and severity. Most do not progress beyond the early infant milestones of a 6-month-old child but are still able to learn to smile, recognize familiar faces and laugh. Other common symptoms of RCDP include heart defects and eczema. Respiratory problems due to infection and underdevelopment of the lungs are currently the most common cause of death in children with classic RCDP1.
Nonclassic (mild) RCDP1
Affected individuals often have skeletal abnormalities, cataracts, intellectual disability and growth restriction, but these are significantly less severe and/or present later in life (compared to classic RCDP1) leading to a delayed diagnosis. Birthweight and height are often close to normal and as these children grow, they fall behind but not as quickly as children with classic RCDP1. Diagnosis is often in early childhood. Symptoms such as developmental delays, joint contractures and cataracts appear by two years of age. Limb shortening, if present, is often milder but is still associated with deformities of joints and contractures which most often affect the elbows, hips and/or knees. Children with mild RCDP1 often learn to walk and develop basic verbal and nonverbal communication skills but may have learning difficulties and behavioral issues such as ADHD or autism. Seizures and cardiac abnormalities also frequently occur but are often less severe and may occur later in life.
Children with RCDP1 RCDP2 and RCDP3 have identical symptoms and features. Children with RCDP4 have similar features such as severe intellectual disability, early-onset seizures, congenital cataracts and growth restriction but do not have shortening of limb bones (rhizomelia) or abnormal calcification of bones and cartilage (chondrodysplasia punctata). Children with RCDP5 typically have symptoms similar to other types, but these are often less severe (like those seen in milder or nonclassic forms). In RCDP5, skeletal abnormalities are less pronounced, epilepsy onset is later, growth delay is less significant and intellectual disability is not as severe.

