Riboflavin Transporter Deficiency

synonyms:
Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndromeFazio-Londe syndromeriboflavin transporter deficiency neuronopathy

overview:
Summary

Riboflavin transporter deficiency is a rare progressive neurodegenerative disorder. Neurodegenerative refers to disorders in which there is damage or loss of nerve cells (neurons) that transmit nerve impulses from the spinal cord or brain (central nervous system) to the nerves that serve (innervate) the muscles or glandular tissue. Riboflavin transporter deficiency is also classified as a neuronopathy, which is a disorder characterized by nerve disease that develops because of damage to motor and sensory nerve cells (neurons) of the peripheral nervous system, which is all the nerves outside of the brain and spinal cord. A motor neuron is a nerve cell that passes nerve impulses from the brain or spinal cord to the muscles or glandular tissue. Sensory nerve cells respond to external stimuli like touch, pain and temperature and convert that stimuli to nerve impulses. The loss of these nerve cells leads to weakness and degeneration (atrophy) of the muscle these nerves serve. In riboflavin transporter deficiency, the nerve cells that are affected are found in the brainstem (which is the lower part of the brain that connects to the spinal cord) and the spinal cord.
Symptoms can include breathing difficulties, facial weakness, hearing loss, abnormalities with the eyes, difficulty chewing and swallowing, muscle weakness of the arms and legs, and an unsteady or unbalanced way of walking (abnormal gait). Symptoms become progressively worse if untreated. Intelligence is not affected by this disorder.
Riboflavin is a vitamin (vitamin B2) and is essential for proper health and development of the body. Riboflavin is not readily synthesized in the body and thus, must be obtained through dietary intake. Although there is no cure, treatment is highly effective and consists of riboflavin supplementation to restore the deficient riboflavin levels. Riboflavin supplementation should be given immediately in individuals suspected of having these disorders.
Riboflavin transporter deficiency is caused by a variation (mutation) in either theSLC52A2orSLC52A3genes and is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.

Introduction

Riboflavin transporter deficiency was previously referred to as Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere (BVVL) syndrome and Fazio-Londe syndrome, named after the physicians and researchers who first described the condition. Fazio-Londe syndrome was used for individuals who had similar symptoms but did not develop hearing loss. The use of these different names can be confusing for patients and caregivers. Researchers have proposed classifying the disorder as: riboflavin transporter deficiency type 2 in individuals with a variation in theSLC52A2gene and riboflavin transporter deficiency type 3 in individuals with a variation in theSLC52A3gene. There is also riboflavin transporter deficiency type 1, which is caused by a variation in theSLC52A1gene, but this has only been described in one person in the medical literature. A variation in theSLC52A1gene has been associated with maternal riboflavin deficiency leading to symptoms in a newborn infant that were resolved with riboflavin supplementation.

symptoms:
The onset of signs and symptoms can range from infancy to early adulthood. One person reported in the medical literature first presented symptoms at 27 years of age, but most affected individuals show symptoms within the first few years of life. Infants and children often develop normally until symptoms first begin. Sometimes, an infection or fever will occur just before symptoms first begin. The specific signs and symptoms that develop and their severity and their progression can be very different from one person to another, even among members of the same family, but for most people who are affected, the first symptom is sensorineural deafness (hearing loss due to inner ear damage). Generally, the later the onset of symptoms, the milder the disorder is. Severe forms can progress rapidly and without treatment can be life-threatening.
Pontobulbar palsy is a common symptom of riboflavin transporter deficiency. Pontobulbar refers to paralysis or impairment of the collection of nerves in the lower part of the medulla oblongata, which is the lower part of the brainstem. This includes several cranial nerves, which help to control facial expressions, hearing and balance, taste, and the muscles used to move the head, shoulders and the tongue. Pontobulbar palsy can cause weakness of facial muscles and reduced facial expressions, difficulty chewing and difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), slurring of speech or difficulty forming words (dysphonia), a high-pitched wheezing sound when breathing (stridor), and brief, spontaneous contractions (fasciculations) of the tongue and weakness of tongue, which can contribute to swallowing difficulties. Difficulties with chewing and swallowing can lead to feeding difficulties in infants, and there can be a risk of aspiration, in which food, fluid or other foreign material accidentally goes into the lungs.
When the disorder begins in infancy, one of the first signs may be a breathing (respiratory) problem. This can be a life-threatening complication if left untreated. Breathing problems result from paralysis of the diaphragm, which is a muscle that separates the chest cavity from the abdominal cavity. When taking in a breath, the diaphragm contracts and moves downward, which increases the space in the chest cavity and allows the lungs to expand when filled with air. Respiratory failure, caused by denervation of the diaphragm, is the main cause of death in patients with riboflavin transporter deficiency.
The most common symptom is sensorineural hearing loss. Sensorineural hearing loss occurs when the nerves within the ear cannot properly send sensory input (sound) to the brain, and is not caused by problems with the ear itself. The degree and production of sensorineural hearing loss can vary from one child to another, but children can experience significant hearing loss.
Some infants may experience degeneration of the main nerve of the eyes (optic nerve), which sends sensory input from the eye to the brain to form images (optic atrophy). This can result in varying degrees of vision loss. Sometimes affected individuals also experience rapid, involuntary movements of the eyes (nystagmus). Less often, drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis) can occur.
Weakness and degeneration of the upper arm muscles (those between the elbow and the shoulder) may also occur and become progressively worse. Eventually, all muscles of the arms and the legs may be affected. There may be weakness of certain muscles of the neck. This is followed by weakness and degeneration of the muscles of the trunk, which is all of the body except for the head and arms and legs (axial muscle weakness). Some affected individuals develop sensory ataxia, in which there is a lack of control over muscle movement coordination. This can lead to an uncoordinated or unsteady manner of walking (abnormal gait). Muscle weakness can lead to an intolerance of exercise or extended activity. Some individuals eventually develop contractures. A contracture is a condition in which there is abnormal shortening of muscle. This can make muscles difficult to stretch and if a joint is involved, the joint can become permanently fixed in a bent or straightened position, completely or partially restricting the movement of the affected joint.
There are differences between riboflavin transporter deficiency types 2 and 3. Type 2 is characterized by muscle weakness that is most prominent in the arms and neck, while in type 3 muscle weakness is more generalized. Vision loss, optic atrophy, and sensory ataxia are more common in type 2 whereas vocal cord paralysis is more common in type 3.

