Ring Chromosome 4

synonyms:
r(4)ring 4ring 4, chromosome

overview:
Ring chromosome 4 is a rare disorder that is typically characterized by loss (deletion) of genetic material from both ends of the 4th chromosome and joining of the chromosomal ends to form a ring. Associated symptoms and findings may vary greatly, depending on the location of lost genetic material and/or other factors. Some affected infants may have a low birth weight; growth delay; delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and physical activities (psychomotor retardation); an abnormally small head (microcephaly); a broad, “beaked” nose; and/or various additional physical abnormalities that are present at birth (congenital anomalies). However, patients have also been reported in which ring chromosome 4 is primarily associated with growth delay, with no major physical anomalies and normal psychomotor development. Ring chromosome 4 is usually caused by spontaneous (de novo) errors very early in the development of the embryo that appear to occur randomly for unknown reasons (sporadically).

symptoms:
As noted above, associated symptoms and physical findings may be extremely variable from person to person. Some infants with ring chromosome 4 may have multiple characteristic features, such as a low birth weight, feeding difficulties, failure to grow and gain weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive), developmental delays, malformations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region, heart defects and/or other physical abnormalities. In addition, certain features may be similar to those seen in individuals with Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome, which is a chromosomal disorder characterized by partial deletion (monosomy) of the short arm (p) of chromosome 4 (partial monosomy 4p) or features similar to those seen in individuals with partial deletion (monosomy) of the long arm (q) of chromosome 4 (partial monosomy 4q. (For further information on this disorder, please see the “Related Disorders” section of this report below.) Other people with ring chromosome 4 may have few symptoms and be primarily affected by growth delays (failure to thrive), with no major physical anomalies.
In some infants and children, ring chromosome 4 may be associated with intellectual disability and delays in the development of physical, mental and behavioral skills that are typically acquired at particular stages (developmental milestones). For example, there are usually delays in language and speech development. However, others with ring chromosome 4 may have normal intelligence and normal psychomotor development.
Craniofacial malformations associated with ring chromosome 4 may include an unusually small head (microcephaly); a broad, rounded, or “beaked” nose; a small jaw (micrognathia); and/or malformed (dysplastic) ears. In some patients, other craniofacial abnormalities may also be present, such as incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate), drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis) and/or other findings.
Some affected individuals may also have abnormal bending or deviation of one or more fingers (clinodactyly); abnormal skin ridge patterns on the palms of the hands (palmar creases); and/or, in affected males, abnormal placement of the urinary opening on the underside of the penis (hypospadias). There have also been a few reports in which ring chromosome 4 is associated with underdevelopment of the kidneys at birth (congenital renal hypoplasia) or a missing kidney (renal agenesis). These conditions may lead to chronic renal failure or an impaired ability of the kidneys to excrete waste products through urine, regulate the balance of salt and water in the body, and perform their other vital functions. In some patients, ring chromosome 4 may also be associated with additional congenital anomalies.

