Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever

synonyms:
RMSFSao Paulo TyphusTickborne Typhus Fever

overview:
Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) is an infectious disease that belongs to a group of diseases known as the spotted fever group rickettsioses. It is caused by infection with the bacterium Rickettsia rickettsii (R. rickettsii), which is usually transmitted by a tick bite. When introduced into the body, the bacterium spreads by the bloodstream or lymphatic vessels and multiplies within and damages certain cells lining the inside of small blood (vascular) vessels (i.e., endothelial cells) as well as vascular smooth muscle cells. Such damage leads to inflammatory changes of affected blood vessels (vasculitis), leakage of fluid from the blood vessels, an abnormal accumulation of fluid in body tissues (edema), and additional abnormalities, resulting in the symptoms and findings associated with the disease.
Approximately two to 14 days after initial infection, early symptoms may include a high fever, severe headaches, muscle pain (myalgia), nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite (anorexia), abdominal pain, and/or features. In addition, in most individuals with RMSF, a distinctive rash develops about three to five days after fever onset. The rash often initially appears on the skin of the wrists and ankles and spreads to involve the palms of the hands, the soles of the feet, the forearms, the trunk, the buttocks, and the neck and facial areas. The rash typically initially consists of small, flat pinkish spots (macules) that eventually become raised (papules) and darker. The lesions usually develop “pin-point” reddish spots (petechia) due to localized bleeding (hemorrhaging) and may merge to form larger hemorrhagic patches. In some severe cases, insufficient oxygenated blood supply to certain tissues may lead to areas of tissue loss (necrosis).
R. rickettsii infection may affect blood vessels, tissues, and organs throughout the body, including the lungs, brain and spinal cord (central nervous system), heart, liver, and kidneys. Associated symptoms and findings may vary, depending upon the specific tissues and organs affected.  Without timely, appropriate treatment, individuals with severe disease may develop potentially life-threatening complications due to tissue and organ injury and dysfunction.
As its name indicates, the disease was originally recognized in the Rocky Mountain states. It has since been reported throughout the continental United States as well as Mexico, Canada, Central America, and South America. As noted above, in most cases, infection with the R. rickettsii bacterium results from tick bites. Several different types of ticks serve as “vectors” for the disease, transmitting the R. rickettsii bacterium to humans.

symptoms:
Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) is considered the most potentially severe form of the spotted fevers.  The onset of symptoms typically occurs approximately two to 14 days (with an average of seven days) after having been bitten by a tick carrying the R. rickettsii bacterium. Early symptoms usually include a fever that may reach 103 or 104 degrees Fahrenheit; chills; extreme exhaustion (prostration); muscle pain (myalgia); and severe headaches that are often associated with pain upon moving the eyes and increased sensitivity to light (photophobia).  Many also develop nausea, with or without vomiting, and loss of appetite (anorexia).  Additional early symptoms may include diarrhea, abdominal tenderness, and abdominal pain.  The disease may be difficult to diagnose in early stages since its early symptoms and signs are nonspecific, resembling those associated with many other infectious and non-infectious diseases.
Most affected individuals develop a skin rash between the third to fifth days after onset of fever. Thus, in some instances, the rash may not be present or may be subtle when affected individuals initially seek medical attention.  Less commonly, the rash may appear as early as the first day of illness or past five days.  In addition, in some rare cases, a rash may never develop (“spotless fever”).
In those who do develop a rash, it often initially develops on the wrists and ankles and then spreads to the palms and soles, forearms, neck, face, under the arms (axilla), buttocks, and trunk.  Rarely, the rash may be atypical in distribution, beginning on the trunk, being widespread at onset, or remaining limited to one region.
The skin rash typically begins as small, flat pinkish spots (macules) that initially become white (blanch) when pressure is applied. The lesions eventually become raised (papular) and darker and may develop reddish spots (petechia) due to small areas of abnormal bleeding (hemorrhages).  With continued disease progression, petechial areas may begin to merge (coalesce) into larger patches that later ulcerate.  In severe cases, inadequate oxygenated blood supply to certain tissues (ischemia) may lead to areas of tissue loss and possible decay (gangrene).  Particularly susceptible areas may include the ear lobes, the tip of the nose, fingers and/or toes (digits), and/or the scrotum in affected males.
In individuals with RMSF, endothelial cell damage and associated changes may affect blood vessels throughout the body.  Therefore, the disease may affect multiple tissues and organ systems, including respiratory, neurologic, heart (cardiac), digestive, and kidney (renal) functioning.  Individuals with severe disease may develop life-threatening complications approximately eight to 15 days after onset if prompt, appropriate treatment has not been received.  Reports indicate that certain factors may be associated with an increased risk of such complications, including advanced age, male sex, and, possibly, alcohol abuse.  In addition, a genetic disorder known as glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency has been associated with rare, fulminant RMSF (see below).
In some affected individuals, there may be extensive infection of the pulmonary circulation, which is the network of blood vessels between the heart and lungs.  Endothelial cell injury and leakage of fluid from the blood vessels may lead to abnormal fluid accumulation within lung tissues and air sacs (pulmonary edema).  Lung (pulmonary) involvement may be suggested by various symptoms and findings, such as coughing; increasing difficulties breathing (dyspnea); inflammation of the lungs (pneumonia); an abnormal accumulation of fluid between layers of the membrane lining the lungs and chest cavity (pleural effusion); and/or other abnormalities.  Some individuals with RMSF may also have cardiac involvement, with inflammation of muscular walls of the heart (myocarditis), potentially leading to disturbances of the normal heart rhythm (dysrhythmias), chest pain, reduced pumping efficiency (heart failure), and/or other findings.
Central nervous system (CNS) involvement may also occur in association with severe cases of RMSF.  Vascular injury may lead to inflammation of the brain (encephalitis), which may initially be associated with confusion, listlessness, and/or drowsiness.  Symptoms and findings that may suggest progressively severe encephalitis may include restless, disorientation, impaired control of voluntary movements (ataxia), sudden episodes of uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain (seizures), unresponsiveness to surroundings (stupor), and/or coma.  Various other neurologic abnormalities have also been reported in severe cases of RMSF.  Such symptoms and findings have included hearing loss; abnormal, involuntary, rapid eye movements (nystagmus); a sensation that the environment or one’s body is revolving (vertigo); abnormally increased reflex responses (hyperreflexia); difficulty articulating speech (dysarthria); impairment of certain cranial nerve pairs arising from the brain (cranial nerve palsy); inability to control urination or defecation (incontinence); muscle weakness or paralysis; and/or other abnormalities.
As noted above, many affected individuals may develop certain digestive symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and/or abdominal tenderness or pain.  In some cases, there may be blood in the contents expelled from the stomach during vomiting and/or in the stools due to abnormal bleeding (hemorrhaging) in the digestive (gastrointestinal [GI]) tract. In severe cases, affected individuals may develop severe hemorrhaging in the upper GI tract.
Some individuals with RMSF may also develop abnormal enlargement of the liver and/or spleen (hepatosplenomegaly). In some cases, infection may result in injury of certain liver (hepatic) cells, leading to abnormalities of liver function; however, reports indicate that liver failure does not result.  Some affected individuals may develop abnormal yellowing of the skin, mucous membranes, and whites of the eyes (jaundice), which is thought to be due to both liver cell injury and destruction of red blood cells (hemolysis).
In some cases, sudden (acute) renal failure may occur in association with severe RMSF.  Endothelial injury, leakage of fluid from blood vessels, and additional changes may lead to an abnormally decreased volume of blood circulating in the body (hypovolemia) and low blood pressure (hypotension).  Such changes may result in reduced filtering of blood by the kidneys (glomeruli filtration); retention of excessive amounts of certain toxic compounds in the blood (prerenal azotemia); and, in severe cases, associated renal failure.
In some cases, additional abnormalities have been reported in association with RMSF.  These have included voluntary (skeletal) muscle injury and changes that may reflect eye (ocular) involvement, such as inflammatory changes of certain blood vessels of the retina and swelling of the head of the optic nerve (papilledema).
Fulminant Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever
In rare cases, R. rickettsii infection may cause an unusually rapid onset of severe RMSF, known as fulminant RMSF. Individuals with particular forms of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency may be prone to developing fulminant RMSF when infected with the R. rickettsii bacterium.  G6PD deficiency is an X-linked genetic condition that affects approximately 10 percent of the black male population.  It is characterized by deficiency of the enzyme G6PD from the red blood cell membranes.  This enzyme plays a crucial role in processing glucose, a simple sugar that is the primary energy source for red blood cells.  In those with G6PD deficiency, certain infections, medications, stress, or other factors may trigger sudden (acute) episodes of premature red blood cell destruction (hemolysis), leading to reduced concentrations of the oxygen-carrying component (hemoglobin) in the blood (anemia).  In individuals with G6PD deficiency, fulminant RMSF is thought to be related to unknown secondary effects of acute hemolysis on the R. rickettsii infection.  In individuals with fulminant RMSF, life-threatening complications may develop within five days after onset.

