Rosenberg Chutorian Syndrome

synonyms:
Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy X type 5Charcot-Marie-Tooth, X-linked recessive 5 (CMTX5)optic atrophy, polyneuropathy, and deafnesspolyneuropathy-deafness-optic atrophy

overview:
Rosenberg-Chutorian syndrome is an extremely rare genetic disorder characterized by the triad of hearing loss, degeneration of the optic nerve (optic atrophy) and neurological abnormalities, specifically disease of the nerves outside of the central nervous system (peripheral neuropathy). The arms and legs are most often affected by peripheral neuropathy. Rosenberg-Chutorian syndrome is inherited as an X-linked disorder with occasional mild symptoms present in the female carrier.
At least two other disorders are characterized by optic atrophy, hearing loss and peripheral neuropathy: Iwashita syndrome and Hagemoser syndrome. Most researchers consider these two disorders and Rosenberg-Chutorian syndrome separate disorders.

symptoms:
The symptoms of Rosenberg-Chutorian syndrome often become apparent during infancy or early childhood. The clinical triad of hearing loss, optic atrophy, and peripheral neuropathy characterizes the disorder.
Individuals with Rosenberg-Chutorian syndrome develop sensorineural hearing loss. In people with type of hearing impairment, sound may be conducted normally through the external and middle ear. However, sound vibrations are not properly transmitted to the brain due to a defect of the inner ear or the auditory nerve, resulting in hearing loss. (With normal hearing, a portion of the inner ear serves to convert sound vibrations to nerve impulses, which are then transmitted via the auditory nerve to the brain.) Although such sensorineural hearing loss is usually present at birth, it may not be detected until later during infancy. As affected children age, deafness may cause delays or impairment in speech development. Hearing loss may be slowly progressive.
Individuals with Rosenberg-Chutorian syndrome also develop degeneration (atrophy) of the optic nerve (optic atrophy). The optic nerve is the structure that sends electrical impulses from the retina to the brain. Optic atrophy results in the loss of visual acuity.
Noninflammatory disease affecting many nerves (polyneuropathy) is another sign of Rosenberg-Chutorian syndrome. The nerves outside the central nervous system, especially those of the arms and legs are affected (peripheral neuropathy). Individuals may develop weakness and wasting (atrophy) of the muscles in the arms and legs. Destruction of the fatty covering surrounding nerves (demyelination) has been present in a few affected individuals.

