Rubella, Congenital

synonyms:
Congenital German MeaslesCongenital Rubella SyndromeExpanded Rubella Syndrome

overview:
Congenital rubella is a syndrome that occurs when a fetus has been infected with the rubella virus while in the uterus. It is primarily characterized by abnormalities of the heart and nervous system, the eyes and the ears. The fetus is most vulnerable to the virus during the first three months of pregnancy, although pregnant women are advised to avoid exposure to rubella virus at all times. Women who contract rubella during pregnancy have a high risk of having a baby with congenital rubella.

symptoms:
Classic congenital rubella syndrome symptoms include a combination of heart, eye and hearing defects, although infection and damage can occur in almost every organ system.  Of the abnormalities most likely to be present at birth, cardiovascular defects are most common, such as underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the pulmonary artery and the failure of a duct connecting the pulmonary artery and aorta (patent ductus arteriosus) to close.
Low birth weight, inflammation of the bones (osteitis), enlarged liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly), disease of the retina (retinopathy), and cataracts of the crystalline lens of the eye also occur frequently.  Brain infection (encephalitis), an abnormally small head (microcephaly), swollen lymph glands (adenopathy), inflammation of the lungs (pneumonitis), jaundice, reduced number of blood platelets (thrombocytopenia), pinpoint purplish red spots due to bleeding in the skin (petechiae) or purpura, and anemia may also occur in babies with this syndrome.
Congenital rubella syndrome can be viewed as a chronic infection that may produce progressive damage.  Central nervous system abnormalities such as hearing loss, mental retardation, behavior problems and slowness in muscular development, are frequent and significant clinical problems.
Most patients who are symptomatic, and many of those who lack signs of infection at birth, will develop some degree of hearing loss or psychomotor damage during early childhood.

