Rubella

synonyms:
German MeaslesThree-Day Measles

overview:
Rubella is a viral infection characterized by fever, headache, swollen lymph nodes, aching joints, and a distinctive red rash. Although it is sometimes called German measles or three-day measles, it is not caused by the same virus that causes measles. Rubella is generally mild in children and more severe but not life-threatening in adults. However, if a pregnant woman is infected with rubella, it can cause serious problems for the unborn child. In the United States, most children receive the measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine, and therefore the disease has become uncommon. In March 2005, health officials announced that rubella has been eliminated from the United States. However, it is still important for Americans to vaccinate their children, and women who are pregnant or might get pregnant still need to be sure they are immune, because the disease exists elsewhere. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), nine rubella cases were reported in the United States in 2004, and all of them originated in other countries.

symptoms:
Rubella is predominantly a childhood disease, although it also occurs among adolescents and adults.  It has a 14- to 21-day incubation period and a 1- to 5-day preliminary phase in children.  The preliminary phase may be minimal or absent in adolescents and adults.  Tender swelling of the glands in the back of the head, the neck and behind the ears is characteristic.  The typical rash appears days after onset of these symptoms.
The rubella rash is similar to that of measles, but it is usually less extensive and disappears more quickly.  It begins on the face and neck and quickly spreads to the trunk and the extremities.  At the onset of the eruption, a flush similar to that of scarlet fever may appear, particularly on the face.  The rash usually lasts about three days.  It may disappear before this time, and rarely there is no rash at all.  A slight fever usually occurs with the rash.  Other symptoms such as headache, loss of appetite, sore throat and general malaise, are more common in adults and teenagers than in children.
After-effects of rubella are rare among children, although there have been cases of joint pain (arthralgia), sleeping sickness and blood clotting problems.  Adult women who contract rubella are often left with chronic joint pains.  Encephalitis is a rare complication that has occurred during extensive outbreaks of rubella among young adults serving in the armed services.  Transient pain in the testes is also a frequent complaint in adult males with rubella.
Congenital rubella syndrome is the name applied to the disease that affects the unborn child when a pregnant woman becomes infected with rubella.  This is most dangerous to the fetus during the first six months of pregnancy.  Congenital rubella syndrome can lead to miscarriage, stillbirth, and birth defects that include cataracts, deafness, mental retardation, and cardiac anomalies.

