Russell-Silver Syndrome

synonyms:
RSSRussell-Silver dwarfismRussell syndromeSilver-Russell dwarfismSilver-Russell syndromeSilver syndromeSRS

overview:
Summary
Russell-Silver syndrome (RSS) is a rare disorder characterized by intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), poor growth after birth, a relatively large head size, a triangular facial appearance, a prominent forehead (looking from the side of the face), body asymmetry and significant feeding difficulties. The wide spectrum of findings varies both in frequency and severity from one affected individual to another. The majority of individuals with RSS are of normal intelligence, but motor and/or speech delay is common.
RSS is genetically heterogeneous, meaning that different genetic abnormalities are known to cause the disorder. Abnormalities involving chromosomes 7 or 11 have been found in up to 60% of RSS patients. However, in approximately 40% of patients with a clinical diagnosis of RSS, the underlying cause is still not known.
Consensus guidelines have been published which give recommendations regarding the investigation, diagnosis and management of individuals with RSS. The management of children with RSS should start as early as possible and often requires the involvement of many different health professionals.
Introduction
Russell-Silver syndrome was first described by Silver in 1953 and Russell in 1954. At first it was thought that they were describing two separate conditions; it took nearly 20 years for doctors to realize that they had seen different aspects of the same condition. The disorder is usually called Russell-Silver syndrome in the United States and Silver-Russell syndrome in Europe.

symptoms:
The symptoms of RSS vary greatly from one individual to another. Some are mildly affected; others may have serious complications. The wide range of potential features can affect many different parts of the body. It is important to note that affected individuals will not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals/ parents should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis. With appropriate medical care, most individuals with RSS will live full, productive lives.
Growth and puberty: Almost all infants with RSS have a birth weight well below the 3rd percentile (<-2SD) even at full term. After birth, weight often continues to fall farther away from the normal range. Parents often report poor appetite (some children never cry for food) and the struggle to get an RSS child to gain weight is one of their main concerns. Special care is required to ensure adequate feeding and caloric intake.
Birth length is usually also below the 3rd percentile (<-2SD), but not always. Growth velocity for length/height continues to be slower than normal throughout infancy and childhood, with no ‘catch-up’ growth. The majority of RSS children are not growth hormone deficient, and research has found that their response to growth hormone therapy does not differ statistically between those who are deficient from those that are not.
Most RSS children have a delayed bone age in early childhood. But it is important to note that the delayed bone age of RSS children is not typical of constitutional growth delay in that the delayed bone age is not predictive of a late growing period. Instead, RSS children typically experience a rapid acceleration of their bone age, often around age 8-9, and their bone age then becomes advanced.
There is only limited information regarding final height individuals with RSS who have not received growth hormone (GH) treatment, but in one study this was reported as approximately 5 feet in males (151 cm) and 4 feet 7 inches (140 cm) in females.
Asymmetry: In many children with RSS, all or part of one side of the body is smaller than the other (asymmetry). This results from the underdevelopment of one side of the body (hemihypotrophy). The extent and severity of asymmetry is extremely variable. In most cases, asymmetry is found in just leg length or arm length but, in some children, one entire side of the body is affected. Individuals may experience difficulties with balance and walking as a result. Any child with significant asymmetry should be followed regularly by an orthopedist. Although, in the majority of children, asymmetry is apparent at birth, it may not become evident until later during childhood. Asymmetry may also improve with age. Treatment with GH does not appear to increase the severity of asymmetry.
Craniofacial features: Characteristic craniofacial features are commonly seen in affected children, particularly in infancy and early childhood. The most common finding is a “large-head-for-body”. The head circumference is almost always far higher on the growth curve than either weight or length (called head sparing/ relative macrocephaly). This, along with the tendency for the jaw to be small (micrognathia), gives rise to the typical triangular facial shape seen in children with RSS. The relatively large head size may cause a child with RSS to be mistakenly diagnosed with hydrocephalus, a condition in which accumulation of excessive cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the skull causes pressure on the tissues of the brain. In addition, affected children may have delayed closure of the ‘soft spot’ (anterior fontanelle) on the top of the head where two of the fibrous joints (sutures) of the skull meet. Another common facial feature is an abnormally prominent forehead, where the forehead protrudes out when the face is viewed from the side. Other craniofacial features associated with RSS are less common, but can include bluish discoloration of the whites of the eyes (blue sclera) during infancy; a small mouth; downturned corners of the mouth; and a high, narrow roof of the mouth (palate).
These characteristic facial features typically become less noticeable with age.
A variety of dental abnormalities have been reported including absence of teeth, abnormally small teeth (microdontia), and crowding of the teeth.
Feeding difficulties: Gastrointestinal problems are common in children with RSS. These can include inflammation of the tube that carries food from the mouth to the stomach (esophagitis), backflow of the contents of the stomach or small intestines into the esophagus (gastroesophageal reflux), delayed gastric emptying (where ingested food takes longer than normal to digest causing the child to feel full) and failure to gain weight or grow at the expected rate for age and sex (failure to thrive). Some children with RSS simply never have a sensation of hunger during early childhood, while others may develop an aversion to food.
Paradoxically, some children will overeat later on. Due to a low muscle mass, it is important to be cautious that children with RSS do not put on too much fat mass. There is also evidence that rapid weight gain in early childhood can lead to problems with the body’s metabolism and increased risk of high blood pressure and heart disease later on in life. RSS children should be well nourished but stay thin.
Hypoglycemia: Infants and children with RSS are at increased risk of hypoglycemia (recurrent episodes of unusually low blood sugar levels). This is likely to be due to their lack of subcutaneous fat and poor appetite. Hypoglycaemia is usually triggered when an affected infant does not eat for an extended period of time (fasting). Symptoms associated with hypoglycemia include weakness, hunger, dizziness, sweating and/or headaches. However, it is important to note that studies have found that infants with RSS have been found to have had night-time hypoglycemic episodes with little to no physical symptoms. Excessive sweating also occurs in some children with RSS without associated hypoglycemia.
Neurodevelopment: Motor development skills may be delayed due to low muscle tone (hypotonia) and relatively large head size, especially in infancy and toddlerhood. Delay in speech development is also common, particularly in those patients with maternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 7 (see ‘Causes’, below). Early intervention (physical, occupational and/or speech therapy) is important and parents should ask their pediatrician for more information.
The majority of children with RSS have normal intelligence. However, there is evidence for differences in frequency of learning and/or behavioral problems, including autistic spectrum, between the different genetic subtypes of RSS, with greater risk for children with maternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 7.
Additional features: Other features have been described in the medical literature with varying frequency.
Orthopedic problems associated with RSS, in addition to body asymmetry, include curvature of the spine (scoliosis) and occasionally hip dislocation. Minor hand and/or foot anomalies are also common, including short and in-curving 5th fingers (clinodactyly), fingers that are fixed in a bent position and cannot be fully straightened (camptodactyly) and webbing of the second and third toes (syndactyly).
A variety of abnormalities affecting the organs of the reproduction and urinary systems (genitourinary abnormalities) have been reported, including failure of one or both testes to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism) and abnormal placement of the urinary opening on the underside of the penis (hypospadias) or under-development of the uterus and upper part of the vagina (Rokitansky syndrome). Structural kidney (renal) abnormalities may also occur. Genitourinary abnormalities are also found at increased frequency in children who are born small-for-gestational-age and who do not have RSS.
Other congenital abnormalities reported less commonly in RSS include structural heart defects and cleft palate (an opening in the roof of the mouth). Congenital anomalies are more common in children with loss of methylation on chromosome 11p15 (see ‘Causes’ below)

