RYR1-Related Diseases

synonyms:
RYR1 myopathyRYR1 muscle diseaseRYR1-related disorders

overview:
Summary
RYR1-related diseases affect skeletal muscle and are caused by changes in theRYR1gene. These changes are referred to as genetic variants (mutations) [1].RYR1variants are the most common cause of muscle weakness present from birth (congenital myopathy). TheRYR1gene contains instructions for the body’s cells to produce a protein called the ryanodine receptor (RyR1) which is important for muscle function [2].
Introduction
RyR1 proteins are located in skeletal muscles, more specifically on the outer edge (membrane) of a calcium-containing structure (sarcoplasmic reticulum) within muscle cells. For skeletal muscles to contract and produce force, calcium must be released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum in a highly controlled manner into the space outside the cell (cytoplasm). Here the calcium binds to other proteins to initiate muscle contraction and produce force. This process is referred to as “excitation-contraction coupling.” RyR1 acts as a gate for muscle cell calcium stores.RYR1variants can prevent RyR1 proteins from being fully closed when they are supposed to be (causing calcium leak) or not opening fully when they are supposed to (causing decreased calcium release). Dysfunctional RyR1 can therefore impair excitation-contraction coupling resulting in muscle weakness. A visual representation of this process is available from the RYR-1 Foundation in theClinical Care Guidelines(Chapter 3). Dysfunctional flow of calcium within muscle cells can also increase production of unstable molecules (free radicals) resulting in oxidative stress (an imbalance between free radicals and antioxidants). RyR1 proteins are susceptible to modification from oxidative stress. This modification can make the existing dysfunction in muscle cell calcium flow worse (increased RyR1 leakiness). CertainRYR1variants can also result in less RyR1 protein being produced. Collectively these mechanisms, all stemming from defects in theRYR1gene, are responsible forRYR1-related diseases [3].
“RYR1-related diseases” is an umbrella term which covers a range ofRYR1-related subtypes that affect the neuromuscular system in humans.RYR1-related diseases can be inherited in a dominant or recessive manner or result from de novo (spontaneous) variants [5]. For more information on inheritance ofRYR1-related diseases, refer to the RYR-1Clinical Care Guidelines(Chapter 1). Subtypes ofRYR1-related disease have been named based on the following.
Muscle biopsy findings (histopathology). Examples include:
central core disease (CCD) [4]multiminicore disease (MmD) [4]centronuclear myopathy (CNM) [5]congenital fiber-type disproportion (CFTD) [6]
Symptoms (clinical phenotype). Examples include:
King-Denborough syndrome (KDS) [7]rhabdomyolysis-myalgia syndrome [8]late-onset axial myopathy [9]atypical periodic paralysis [10]
Drug-gene interactions (pharmacogenetics). Examples include:
malignant hyperthermia susceptibility (MHS) [11]statin-induced myopathy [12]
Symptoms ofRYR1-related diseases are often present from birth (congenital) or appear in early infancy and can be static, dynamic or a combination of both. Static symptoms (present at all times) include muscle weakness, motor delay, difficulties walking and climbing stairs, scoliosis, facial muscle weakness and eye muscle weakness (ophthalmoparesis) [13, 14]. Dynamic symptoms (come and go based on certain triggers) include heat illness, exercise-induced muscle breakdown (rhabdomyolysis), muscle pain (myalgia), muscle cramps and fatigue [8].
RYR1variants are also the leading cause of malignant hyperthermia (MH) susceptibility (MHS) accounting for >60% of cases. MH is a potentially fatal reaction which occurs in susceptible individuals following exposure to volatile anesthetics or depolarizing muscle relaxants which trigger a rapid increase in body temperature (hyperthermia) and muscle breakdown (rhabdomyolysis) [11]. MH reactions are treated with the drug Dantrolene. For more information on MHS, refer to the RYR-1Clinical Care Guidelines(Chapter 4).
Symptoms experienced by individuals withRYR1-related diseases can be highly variable; however, disease course is often non-progressive or very slowly progressive. Lifespan is generally normal in affected individuals and cognitive development is unaffected. Although there is no cure or approved treatment forRYR1-related diseases, supportive strategies including physical therapy can help manage functional impairments and promote a high quality of life.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms ofRYR1-related diseases are highly variable, sometimes even among affected individuals within the same family. In general, greater disease severity is associated with a recessive inheritance pattern, however, there are exceptions.
Common symptoms related to skeletal muscles include:
Weakness of the extraocular eye muscles (ophthalmoparesis)Weakness of the facial musclesWeakness of muscles closest to the torso (proximal muscle weakness)Muscle cramping and pain (myalgia)Decreased tolerance to exercise and heat
Breathing problems: It is very important to be aware of breathing problems associated withRYR1-related diseases since this can be severe to life-threatening in some patients. Weakness of breathing (respiratory) muscles can occur in affected individuals because the muscles that support breathing (diaphragm and accessory abdominal muscles) are skeletal muscles. Breathing problems can range from mild impairment of respiratory function, to sleep apnea requiring breathing support during sleep (CPAP/BiPAP), to severe breathing problems require continuous support via mechanical ventilation [13]. For more information on breathing problems associated withRYR1-related diseases, refer to the RYR-1Clinical Care Guidelines(Chapter 5).
Malignant hyperthermia: SomeRYR1variants are associated with susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia (MH), a severe and potentially fatal reaction to certain inhaled anesthetics (sedating or paralyzing drugs given by a doctor for medical/surgical procedures) or depolarizing muscle relaxants (succinylcholine) [11]. Anyone with a potentially disease-causing (pathogenic)RYR1variant should take malignant hyperthermia precautions if anesthesia or succinylcholine is required for a medical/surgical procedure. Although rare, there are also case reports of episodicRYR1-related crises [15] (also referred to as “MH-like events,” or “awake MH”) in which individuals develop life-threatening reactions to non-anesthetic stimuli such as environmental heat stress or viral illness [16, 17]. For more information on MH, refer to the RYR-1Clinical Care Guidelines(Chapter 4).
Exertional rhabdomyolysis: CertainRYR1variants may also lower the threshold for onset of muscle fiber breakdown upon physical exertion (exertional rhabdomyolysis), accounting for up to 30% of reported cases [8]. Symptoms include muscle pain, exercise intolerance, and cold-induced muscle stiffness. Affected individuals are often asymptomatic prior to being exposed to one or more triggers which include exercise in the heat, viral illness and use of statin medications. A subset of individuals withRYR1-related exertional rhabdomyolysis also test positive for malignant hyperthermia susceptibility. Preventative measures for exertional rhabdomyolysis include limiting exercise in hot and humid environments and consulting a sports medicine specialist or physical therapist to help develop a structured incremental exercise program at lower intensities. For more information on exertional rhabdomyolysis, refer to the RYR-1Clinical Care Guidelines(Chapter 4).

