Saethre Chotzen Syndrome

synonyms:
acrocephalosyndactyly type IIIacrocephaly, skull asymmetry, and mild syndactylyACS3ACS type IIIChotzen syndromeSCS

overview:
Saethre Chotzen syndrome (SCS) belongs to a group of rare genetic disorders known as “acrocephalosyndactyly” disorders. All of these are characterized by premature closure of the fibrous joints (cranial sutures) between certain bones of the skull (craniosynostosis), and/or webbing or fusion (syndactyly) of certain fingers or toes (digits).
In many infants with SCS, cranial sutures may fuse unevenly and this may contribute to the head and face appearing to be dissimilar from one side to the other (craniofacial asymmetry). Additional variations of the skull and facial (craniofacial) region may also be present, such as widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism) with unusually shallow eye cavities (orbits); drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis); and a state where the eyes do not point in the same direction (strabismus). Some affected individuals may also have a “beaked” nose; deviation of the partition that separates the nostrils (deviated nasal septum); small, low-set ears; and an underdeveloped upper jaw (hypoplastic maxilla). The disorder is also associated with variations of the hands and feet, such as partial fusion of soft tissues (cutaneous syndactyly) of certain fingers and toes (digits); unusually short digits (brachydactyly); and broad great toes. Intelligence is usually normal. SCS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner.

symptoms:
SCS is primarily characterized by premature closure of the fibrous joints (cranial sutures) between certain bones in the skull (craniosynostosis), distinctive facial variations, and/or variations of the fingers and toes (digits). However, associated symptoms and findings may be extremely variable, including among affected members of the same family. For example, there have been reports in which some family members have had characteristic digital abnormalities alone, whereas others have been primarily affected by craniosynostosis.
When craniosynostosis is present, the degree of skull (cranial) malformation may be variable, depending on the specific cranial sutures involved and the order and rate of progression. In many affected infants and children, early closure of the coronal suture which is found between bones forming the forehead (frontal bone) and the upper sides of the skull causes the top of the head to appear pointed (acrocephaly) or the head to seem unusually short or broad (brachycephaly). In addition, the cranial sutures often fuse unevenly, causing the head and face to appear somewhat dissimilar from one side to the other (plagiocephaly and facial asymmetry). Cases have also been reported in which the head appears triangular in shape (trigonocephaly) or the forehead is unusually prominent due to premature closure of the suture of the frontal bone (i.e. frontal or metopic suture). In some instances, early closure of certain cranial sutures may lead to abnormally increased pressure within the skull (intracranial pressure).
Many individuals with SCS have additional craniofacial variations, resulting in a subtle, but distinctive, facial appearance. Such abnormalities may include a broad forehead with a low hairline; drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis); a “beaked” nose, depressed nasal bridge, and deviated nasal septum; unusually broad, flat mid-facial regions (midface hypoplasia); and a small upper jaw (hypoplastic maxilla), with protrusion of the lower jaw (relative mandibular prognathism). Additional eye (ocular) abnormalities are also often present, such as widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism); shallow eye cavities (orbits); strabismus; and/or abnormal narrowing of the tear ducts (lacrimal duct stenosis), potentially causing decreased tearing and an increased susceptibility to eye infections.
Other craniofacial variations may also be associated with the disorder. Many affected individuals have small, low-set, or differences in parts of the ear (e.g. prominent ear crura). In addition, mild hearing impairment is frequent. Abnormalities of the mouth (oral) region often include a highly arched roof of the mouth (palate) and dental defects, such as absence or malformation of certain teeth, the presence of extra (supernumerary) teeth, and/or improper contact of the teeth of the upper jaw with those of the lower jaw (malocclusion) may occur. In rare cases, there may be incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate).
SCS may also be characterized by variations of the fingers and toes (digits). Some affected individuals have partial webbing or fusion of the soft tissues (cutaneous syndactyly) of certain digits, particularly between the second and third fingers and second and third toes. However, less commonly, syndactyly extends from the second to the fourth fingers or involves other toes. Additional digital malformations may include unusually short fingers and toes (brachydactyly); abnormal bending or deviation (clinodactyly) of the fifth fingers (“pinkies”); “finger-like” thumbs; and/or broad, deviating great toes.
Additional physical abnormalities may also be associated with SCS. Some affected individuals have short stature. Less commonly, musculoskeletal abnormalities may also be present, such as union or fusion of certain bones of the spinal column within the neck (cervical vertebrae), abnormal fusion of the forearm bones (radioulnar synostosis), limited extension of the elbows or knees, short collarbones (clavicles), and/or hip deformities (coxa valga). Occasional additional findings may include failure of the testes to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism) in affected males; kidney (renal) abnormalities; and/or heart (cardiac) defects.
Most individuals with SCS have normal intelligence. However, mild to moderate intellectual disability is sometimes present.
For further information, please see the “Causes” section of this report below regarding the “TWIST1” gene.

