Sakati Syndrome

synonyms:
ACPS IIIACPS with Leg HypoplasiaAcrocephalopolysyndactyly Type IIISakati-Nyhan Syndrome

overview:
Sakati syndrome is an extremely rare disorder that belongs to a group of rare genetic disorders known as “Acrocephalopolysyndactyly” (ACPS). All forms of ACPS are characterized by premature closure of the fibrous joints (cranial sutures) between certain bones of the skull (craniosynostosis), causing the top of the head to appear pointed (acrocephaly); webbing or fusion (syndactyly) of certain fingers or toes (digits); and/or more than the normal number of digits (polydactyly). In addition, Sakati syndrome, which is also known as ACPS type III, is associated with abnormalities of bones of the legs, structural heart malformations that are present at birth (congenital heart defects), and/or other findings. Sakati syndrome is thought to be caused by a new genetic change (mutation) that occurs randomly for unknown reasons (sporadically). This mutation is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait.

symptoms:
In Sakati syndrome, the fibrous joints between the bones in the skull (cranial sutures) close prematurely (craniosynostosis), causing an affected infant’s head to grow upward at an accelerated rate. As a result, the head appears long, narrow, and pointed at the top (acrocephaly). Affected individuals also have several unusual facial characteristics including a flat, abnormally small face; protruding eyes; an abnormally wide space between the eyes (ocular hypertelorism); an elongated nose; large, malformed (dysplastic) and low-set ears; and a prominent forehead.
Sakati syndrome is also characterized by several deformities of the hands and feet, including abnormally short fingers (brachydactyly), unusually broad thumbs and big toes, webbed toes (syndactyly), and more than the normal number of fingers and/or toes (polydactyly). Abnormalities of the legs are also present, including bowed thigh bones (femurs); abnormally shaped, displaced calf bones (fibulas); and underdeveloped shin bones (hypoplastic tibias). In addition, both the legs and arms are shorter than normal.
Additional symptoms associated with this disorder may include teeth that are crowded together, an underdeveloped upper jaw bone (maxillary hypoplasia), jaws that project forward (prognathism), a short neck, a low hairline, absence of hair (alopecia), and congenital heart disease. Intelligence is usually within normal limits.

