Sandhoff Disease

synonyms:
GM2 gangliosidosis, type 2hexosaminidases A and B deficiencybeta-hexosaminidase-beta-subunit deficiencytotal hexosaminidase deficiencySandhoff-Jatzkewitz-Pilz disease

overview:
Summary
Sandhoff disease is a rare lysosomal storage disease. It causes the destruction of nerve cells (neurodegeneration). This leads to problems with thinking and moving. Sandhoff disease is caused by harmful changes in the HEXB gene. Harmful changes in this gene cause decreased amounts of two enzymes in the recycling centers (lysosomes) of the cell. Without these enzymes, certain fats (lipids) build up in large amounts in the nerve cells. This damages the brain and spinal cord (central nervous system). Sandhoff disease is very similar to Tay Sachs disease.
Introduction
Lysosomal storage diseases affect the enzymes in the recycling centers (lysosomes) of the cell. Lysosomes use enzymes to break down or “digest” molecules in our cells. When these enzymes are not working properly, the molecules accumulate in harmful amounts. This causes damage to different organs in the body.

symptoms:
Infantile Sandhoff DiseaseThe most common type of Sandhoff disease causes rapidly progressing mental and motor decline in infancy. Within the first six months of life, infants with Sandhoff disease will experience weakness. They lose skills like turning over, sitting, and crawling. They can also have trouble with feeding, overreaction to loud sudden noises, delayed speech, early blindness, seizures, heart murmur, and continuously tight muscles (spasticity). A doctor may notice red spots in the back of the eye (cherry-red spots of the macula) and an abnormal reflex of the foot that indicates damage to the nervous system (the Babinski reflex). Other signs of Sandhoff disease can include a large head (macrocephaly) and unique facial features. Infants with this form of Sandhoff disease usually do not live past 2-5 years.
Juvenile and Adult Sandhoff DiseaseSandhoff disease can also happen in older children and adults. These individuals will experience a slower mental and motor decline than in infantile Sandhoff disease. The onset and severity of symptoms can vary. A specific symptom of later-onset Sandhoff disease is muscle weakness affecting the muscles of the arms, legs, and hips. Other symptoms include muscle loss (muscle atrophy), balance problems, uncontrollable muscle contraction (dystonia), damage to nerves controlling involuntary bodily functions (autonomic neuropathy), a loss of intellectual function (cognitive dysfunction), psychiatric illness and dementia.

