Schinzel Syndrome

synonyms:
Pallister ulnar-mammary syndromeulnar-mammary syndromeUMS

overview:
Schinzel syndrome, also known as ulnar-mammary syndrome, is a rare inherited disorder characterized by abnormalities of the bones of the hands and forearms in association with underdevelopment (hypoplasia) and dysfunction of certain sweat (apocrine) glands and/or the breasts (mammary glands). Abnormalities affecting the hands and/or forearms range from underdevelopment of the bone in the tip of the fifth finger (hypoplastic terminal phalanx) to underdevelopment or complete absence of the bone on the outer aspect of the forearm (ulna).
In addition, certain sweat glands such as those located under the arms may be underdeveloped or absent, resulting in diminished ability or inability to sweat (perspire). In some cases, the breasts (mammary glands) may also be underdeveloped or absent; as a result, affected females exhibit a diminished ability or an inability to produce milk (lactate).
The range and severity of physical abnormalities associated with Schinzel syndrome varies greatly among affected individuals; some cases may be very mild, while others may be more severe.

symptoms:
Schinzel syndrome, also known as ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS), is an extremely rare inherited disorder characterized by abnormalities affecting the bones of the hands and forearms and/or underdevelopment (hypoplasia) and dysfunction of certain sweat glands (apocrine) and/or the breasts (mammary glands).  The physical features and symptoms associated with Schinzel syndrome vary greatly from case to case.
Abnormalities affecting the hands and/or forearms may range from underdevelopment (hypoplasia) of the bone in the tip of the fifth finger (hypoplastic terminal phalanx) to underdevelopment or complete absence of the bone on the outer aspect of the forearm (ulna); underdevelopment (hypoplasia), abnormal bending (bowing), or absence of the forearm bone on the thumb side of the arm (radius); and/or hypoplasia or absence of certain fingers, such as the third, fourth, and/or fifth fingers (oligodactyly).  In some cases, certain bones of the fingers (e.g., phalanges of the fourth and fifth digits), within the body of the hand (metacarpals), and/or within the wrist (carpal bones) may be underdeveloped or absent.  In addition, in some infants with digital hypoplasia, certain fingers may be permanently fixed in a flexed position (camptodactyly) and/or the fifth fingers may be abnormally bent (clinodactyly).  Affected infants may have additional finger (digital) abnormalities with or without ulnar, radial, and/or digital malformations on the other side of the body (contralateral limb deficiencies), such as extra digits on the “pinky” side of the hand (postaxial polydactyly).  In rare cases, infants with Schinzel syndrome may also exhibit underdevelopment of the long bone of the upper arm (humerus).  In affected individuals, digital and/or upper limb abnormalities tend to vary in severity from side to side (asymmetry).  Malformations affecting the fingers, hands, and arms may lead to complications, such as limitations in range of movement.  In rare cases, individuals with the disorder may also exhibit underdeveloped, abnormally short, or absent toes.
In some cases, individuals with Schinzel syndrome may also have abnormalities of certain sweat glands such as those under the arms (axillary apocrine glands).  Such abnormalities may include underdevelopment (hypoplasia) or absence of the sweat glands, resulting in a reduced ability or complete inability to sweat (perspire).  Affected individuals may also have little or no hair under the arms and lack body odor.  In addition, in some cases, affected individuals may exhibit underdevelopment or complete absence of the nipples and/or breasts (mammary glands) and, in affected females, the breasts may be unable to produce milk (lactate).  However, in other cases, affected individuals may have normal breast development with, in affected females, the ability to produce milk.
In some cases, affected individuals may experience delayed growth that, in some cases, may result in short stature.  However, in other cases, affected individuals may experience late “catch-up” growth.
In addition, individuals with Schinzel syndrome may also have genital abnormalities.  In some cases, affected males may have abnormally low levels of testicular function (hypogenitalism), resulting in delayed development of secondary sexual characteristics (puberty) (e.g., deepening of the voice, characteristic hair growth patterns, sudden increase in growth and development of the testes and scrotum, etc.).  In addition, affected males may have an abnormally small penis and one or both of the testes may fail to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism).  In affected females, the thin membrane that normally partially covers the vaginal opening (hymen) may completely cover the vaginal opening (imperforate hymen), potentially causing menstrual blood to collect in the vagina.  In addition, in some cases, the uterus may be abnormally shaped (bicornate uterus).
In some cases, individuals with Schinzel syndrome may have additional abnormalities such as excessive body mass (obesity), absence or improper positioning of certain teeth (ectopic upper canines), and/or malformations of bones of the spine (vertebrae) such as abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis).  In addition, the soft-tissue structure that hangs at the back of the throat (uvula) may be abnormally divided (bifid).  In some cases, the voice box (larynx) may be covered with an abnormal fibrous membrane (congenital laryngeal web) that involves the vocal cords, the two fibrous bands of tissue that are essential for voice production.  In such cases, affected individuals may experience some difficulties with swallowing, breathing (aspiration), and/or speech.  In addition, some affected infants may exhibit abnormal narrowing (stenosis) of the band of muscle fibers (pyloric sphincter) at the junction between the stomach and the small intestine (pyloric stenosis), potentially resulting in obstruction of the normal flow of stomach contents into the small intestine.  In a few cases, affected individuals may have protrusion of portions of the large intestine through an abnormal opening in layers of muscle lining the abdominal cavity (inguinal hernia).  In addition, the anus may be abnormally narrowed or closed off (anal stenosis or atresia).
In addition, according to the medical literature, three of four affected individuals within one family (kindred) had a ventricular septal defect (VSD), a heart abnormality that is present at birth (congenital).  In individuals with VSDs, there is an abnormal opening in the fibrous partition (septum) that separates the two lower chambers (ventricles) of the heart.  The size and location of the defect determine the range and severity of the symptoms.  Because it is not clear whether this is an incidental finding, its implications are not fully understood.  (For more information on this disorder, choose “Ventricular Septal Defect” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.)

