Schnitzler Syndrome

synonyms:
Schnitzler's syndrome

overview:
Schnitzler syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by a chronic reddish rash that resembles hives (urticaria) and elevated levels of a specific protein in the blood (monoclonal IgM gammopathy). Symptoms associated with Schnitzler syndrome may include repeated bouts of fever, joint inflammation (arthritis), joint pain (arthralgia), bone pain, and other findings such as enlarged lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy). A monoclonal IgM gammopathy refers to the uncontrolled growth of a single clone (monoclonal) of plasma cells, which results in the abnormal accumulation of M-proteins (also known as immunoglobulin M or IgM) in the blood. However, the specific role these proteins play and the exact cause of Schnitzler syndrome is unknown. Schnitzler syndrome is difficult to classify and some researchers have suggested that it is an acquired autoinflammatory syndrome. Autoinflammatory syndromes are a group of disorders characterized by recurrent episodes of inflammation due to an abnormality of the innate immune system. They are not the same as autoimmune disorders, in which the adaptive immune system malfunctions and mistakenly attacks healthy tissue.

symptoms:
The symptoms associated with Schnitzler syndrome can vary from one person to another. The symptoms can occur all at once or, because they often come and go, the symptoms can occur at different times. The symptoms tend to persist for many years (chronic disease).
A reddish, rash that resembles hives (urticaria) is the hallmark finding associated with Schnitzler syndrome. The distinctive rash usually consists of raised, reddish bumps (papules) and flatter, wider lesions (plaques). In most cases, a rash is the first symptom to appear in individuals with Schnitzler syndrome. The rash usually lasts for a day to two and then disappears without scarring. However, a new rash often develops each day so that a rash is a constant occurrence but the frequency of the rash can vary greatly from one person to another and some people only develop a rash a few times during the year.
When the rash first develops, it usually is not itchy (not pruritic). However, in approximately 45 percent of cases, the rash will become itchy within a few years. The trunk, arms and legs are most often affected. The head, neck, palms and soles are usually spared. Some affected individuals have reported that alcohol, spicy foods and stress have aggravated the rash.
Fevers that come and go over a period of time (chronic, intermittent fevers) are the second most common symptom in individuals with Schnitzler syndrome. The frequency of fevers varies greatly, ranging from being a daily occurrence to only a couple times per year. Fevers are usually unrelated to the skin rash, are well-tolerated and are rarely accompanied by chills.
Additional symptoms associated with Schnitzler syndrome include bone pain, most often affecting the lower legs and hips, and joint pain, most often affecting the large joints such as the hips, knees, wrists and ankles. In some cases, inflammation of the joints (arthritis) may develop with accompanying swelling, redness and a feeling of heat or warmth in the joint. Despite joint involvement, joint degeneration or destruction has not been reported in individuals with Schnitzler syndrome.
Abnormal enlargement of the lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy), the liver (hepatomegaly) and the spleen (splenomegaly) may also occur in some cases. Additional nonspecific symptoms that have been reported in individuals with Schnitzler syndrome include unintended weight loss, fatigue and a general feeling of poor health (malaise). Rapid swelling due to fluid accumulation just beneath the surface skin (angioedema) is very rare.
Most cases of Schnitzler syndrome have a chronic, benign course. However, over a period of 10 years, approximately 15 percent of affected individuals developed cancer, most often cancer caused by the overproduction of white blood cells (lymphoproliferative disorders) such as Waldenström macroglobulinemia.
Some individuals with Schnitzler syndrome have elevated levels of a different protein (see Causes section below) than individuals with classic Schnitzler syndrome. These individuals are classified as having variant Schnitzler syndrome and have very similar symptoms to classic Schnitzler syndrome.

