Schwartz Jampel Syndrome

synonyms:
chondrodystrophic myotoniamyotonic myopathy, dwarfism, chondrodystrophy, ocular & facial anomaliesSchwartz-Jampel-Aberfeld syndromeSJA syndromeSJS

overview:
Schwartz-Jampel syndrome (SJS) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by abnormalities of the skeletal muscles, including muscle weakness and stiffness (myotonic myopathy); abnormal bone development (bone dysplasia); permanent bending or extension of certain joints in a fixed position (joint contractures); and/or growth delays resulting in abnormally short stature (dwarfism). Affected individuals may also have small, fixed facial features and various abnormalities of the eyes, some of which may cause impaired vision. The range and severity of symptoms may vary from person to person. Two types of the disorder have been identified that may be differentiated by age of onset and other factors. SJS type 1, which is considered the classical form of the disorder, may become apparent during early to late infancy or childhood. SJS type 2, a more rare form of the disorder, is typically recognized at birth (congenital). Most researchers now believe that SJS type 2 is actually the same disorder as Stuve-Wiedemann syndrome and not a form of SJS. (For more information on Stuve-Wiedemann syndrome see the Related Disorders section of this report.)
SJS is thought to be inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. However, some cases reported in the medical literature suggest an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern.

symptoms:
SJS is primarily characterized by abnormalities of skeletal muscle, bone, and cartilage; malformations of the eyes and the face; and growth delays. In some cases, additional abnormalities may also be present. The range and severity of associated symptoms and physical findings varies from person to person, depending upon the form of the disorder present and other factors. Two forms of the disorder have been recognized, which are known as SJS types 1 and 2. SJS type 1, which is considered the classical form of the disorder, may be recognized during early to late infancy or childhood, whereas SJS type 2 is apparent at birth (congenital).
Infants with classical or type 1 SJS may have a normal or low birth weight. From the first or second year of life through childhood, an affected child’s growth rate may be below the normal range. Although the growth rate may increase during puberty, adult height may still be below the normal range; as a result, such affected individuals may have abnormally short stature (dwarfism). In addition to possible growth delays, most infants with SJS are delayed in reaching developmental milestones, such as crawling, sitting, walking, etc. (delayed motor development). However, after the age of about two years, their motor abilities may improve. Mental development is generally normal.
The skeletal muscle abnormalities associated with SJS may be recognized at birth or infancy or may become apparent within the second year of life. Affected children may have muscle stiffness and weakness, an inability to relax certain muscles after they have contracted (myotonic myopathy), and abnormally small skeletal muscles. In addition, several joints may become fixed in a permanently bent or extended position (joint contractures) due to shortening of muscle fibers. In some cases, the symptoms of myotonic myopathy associated with SJS may gradually diminish.
Most individuals with classical SJS also have abnormalities of bone and cartilage growth (chondrodystrophy). The layers of cartilage that separate the shaft of a long bone (diaphysis) from its growing end (epiphyseal plate or growth plate) may develop abnormally (epiphyseal dysplasia). (Long bone refers to bones in the arms and legs.) As a result, the growing end (epiphysis) of the long bone may flatten and fragment. Such flattening of the epiphysis of the thighbone (femur) may contribute to or occur in association with abnormal development of the hipbone (hip dysplasia).
Additional skeletal abnormalities may also occur in children with classical Schwartz-Jampel syndrome. Affected individuals may have an abnormally short neck, malformation of the hip (hip dysplasia), and/or a sideways and front-to-back curvature of the spine (kyphoscoliosis). In addition, the breastbone (sternum) may be abnormally prominent (“pigeon breast” or pectus carinatum).
Some researchers suggest that the classical form of SJS may be divided into two distinct subgroups, depending upon the severity of associated skeletal abnormalities. SJS type 1A, which may be recognized during early childhood, is characterized by mild skeletal changes (skeletal dysplasia) that occur secondary to skeletal muscle abnormalities. Type 1B may be recognized at birth or early infancy based upon primary, more pronounced abnormalities of bone development (primary skeletal dysplasia) in association with muscle defects.
Many of the musculoskeletal abnormalities occurring in association with classical SJS (e.g., myotonia, joint contractures, hip dysplasia, etc.) may make it difficult for affected individuals to perform certain voluntary movements. For example, many may have difficulty walking independently.
Within the first or second year of life, facial abnormalities associated with classical SJS also become apparent. The mouth and chin may appear abnormally small; the face may appear flat; facial expressions may seem fixed or mask-like; and the face may have a characteristic “pinched” appearance. In addition, the entire face may seem small in relation to the size of the head. Affected individuals may also have abnormally low-set ears.
Many individuals with classical SJS also have several eye (ocular) abnormalities. The front transparent region of the eye through which light passes may be small (microcornea) or the entire eye may appear unusually small (microphthalmia). The opening between the upper and lower eyelids (palpebral fissures) may be narrow and short (blepharophimosis), and the lids may have two or more rows of eyelashes. Affected individuals may also have nearsightedness (myopia), clouding of the lenses of the eyes (juvenile cataracts), and/or intermittent, involuntary contractions or spasms of the muscles around the eyes (blepharospasm). Such eye abnormalities may result in varying degrees of visual impairment. In cases of blepharospasm, an inability to open the eyelids due to involuntary muscle spasms may result in functional blindness. The degree of visual impairment in affected individuals depends upon the severity and/or combination of eye abnormalities present. (For more information on blepharospasm, please see the Related Disorders section below.)
In some cases, individuals with classical SJS may have additional abnormalities. Affected individuals may have high-pitched voices and their speech may be difficult to understand. In some cases, there may be protrusion of portions of the large intestine through an abnormal opening in muscles of the groin (inguinal hernia) or the abdominal wall where the umbilical cord joins the fetal abdomen (umbilical hernia). In addition, some affected males may have unusually small testes. Individuals with the disorder may also be prone to repeated respiratory infections.
Some individuals with SJS may be at risk for malignant hyperthermia, a condition in which exposure to certain anesthetics or muscle relaxants may cause a sudden rise in body temperature (hyperthermia), muscle twitching and stiffness, and other symptoms. Without appropriate treatment, life-threatening symptoms may result. (For more information on this condition, please see the Related Disorders section of this report.)
As mentioned above, researchers have recognized a second, more severe form of Schwartz-Jampel syndrome, known as SJS type 2. Because this form of the disorder is apparent at birth, it is also often referred to as “neonatal” SJS. SJS type 2 is characterized by distinctive facial abnormalities, including a “pursed” appearance of the mouth; muscle weakness; and abnormalities of the growing ends of the long bones (metaphyses) of the arms and legs (limbs), associated bowing of the limbs (campomelic-metaphyseal skeletal dysplasia), and short stature. Additional findings typically include permanent bending or extension of several joints in various fixed postures (joint contractures) at birth. Affected infants may also have feeding, swallowing, and breathing difficulties and be prone to sudden and severe rises in body temperature (hyperthermia), potentially leading to life-threatening complications. Many researchers suggest that SJS type 2 and a disorder known as Stuve-Wiedemann syndrome are the same disease entity.

