Scleroderma

overview:
Scleroderma is a rare autoimmune connective tissue disorder characterized by abnormal thickening of the skin. Connective tissue is composed of collagen, which supports and binds other body tissues. There are several types of scleroderma. Some types affect certain, specific parts of the body, while other types can affect the whole body and internal organs (systemic). Scleroderma is also known as progressive systemic sclerosis. The exact cause of scleroderma is unknown.

symptoms:
The early symptoms of scleroderma vary considerably. Distinctive abnormalities on the skin (cutaneous lesions) usually appear later in the course of the disease. Common symptoms of scleroderma may include painful joints (arthralgia), morning stiffness, fatigue, and/or weight loss. The intermittent loss (triggered by cold temperatures) of blood supply to the fingers, toes, nose, and/or ears (Raynaud’s phenomenon) is an early and frequent complaint of people with scleroderma.
People with scleroderma have areas of skin that become hard and leathery (indurated). These areas of hardness are widespread and typically appear on both sides of the body. Eventually, tissue loss (atrophy) occurs and the skin becomes more highly colored (hyperpigmentation).
Morphea, or localized scleroderma, usually begins between the ages of 20 to 50 years as patches of yellowish or ivory-colored rigid, dry skin (inflammatory stage). These are followed by the appearance of firm, hard, oval-shaped plaques with ivory centers that are encircled by a violet ring. These spots generally appear on the trunk, face, and/or extremities. Many patients with localized morphea improve spontaneously (without treatment). Generalized morphea is more rare and serious, and involves the skin (dermis) but not the internal organs.
Linear scleroderma appears as a band-like thickening of skin on the arms or legs. This type of scleroderma is most likely to be on one side of the body (unilateral) but may be on both sides (bilateral). Linear scleroderma generally appears in young children and is characterized by the failure of one limb (i.e., arm or leg) to grow as rapidly as its counterpart. The band of thick skin may extend from the hip to the heel or from the shoulder to the hand. Deep tissue loss may occur along this band.
Systemic scleroderma includes a wide range of symptoms including inflammatory diseases of the muscles (i.e., polymyositis or dermatomyositis), swelling (edema) of the fingers and/or hands, microvascular abnormalities, lung disease (i.e., progressive interstitial fibrotic pulmonary disease), kidney dysfunction (i.e., rapidly progressive renal failure), cardiovascular problems (i.e., myocardial accelerated hypertension), gastrointestinal malfunction (i.e., lack of mobility of the esophagus and colon), and/or abnormalities of the immune system. (For more information, choose “Polymyositis” and “Dermatomyositis” as your search terms in the Rare Disease Database.)

