Segawa Syndrome

synonyms:
autosomal dominant dopa-responsive dystonia (DRDautosomal dominant segawa syndromeDYT5 dystoniaGTP cyclohydrolase 1-deficient dopa-responsive dystoniaguanosine triphosphate cyclohydrolase I deficiencyprogressive dystonia with marked diurnal fluctuationSegawa disease

overview:
Segawa syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by an uncoordinated or clumsy manner of walking (abnormal gait) and dystonia. Dystonia is a general term for a group of muscle disorders generally characterized by involuntary muscle contractions that force the body into abnormal, sometimes painful, movements and positions (postures). Dystonia in Segawa syndrome usually affects the legs, but some children may first develop dystonia in the arms. In some cases, usually in adolescents and adults, the symptoms of Segawa syndrome may become noticeably worse or more pronounced in the afternoon and evening than in the morning (marked diurnal fluctuation). The symptoms of Segawa syndrome usually become apparent by around six years of age. Intelligence is not affected. Children with Segawa syndrome usually show a dramatic and sustained improvement when treated with levodopa. Levodopa is an amino acid that is converted to dopamine, a brain chemical that serves as a neurotransmitter. Dopamine is deficient in children with Segawa syndrome. The disorder is caused by mutations of the GCH-1 gene. The GCH-1 gene mutation is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of Segawa syndrome can vary greatly from one person to another, even among members of the same family. Symptoms usually become apparent by around six years of age. In some cases, symptoms may not become apparent until later in childhood or even as late as adulthood.
The initial symptom of Segawa syndrome is usually an uncoordinated or clumsy manner of walking (abnormal gait) that develops during early childhood because of involuntary muscle contractions that force the body into abnormal, sometimes painful, movements and positions (dystonia). The legs are usually affected first, typically one foot. Dystonia of the foot may force the foot into a twisted posture that resembles clubfoot. Children with Segawa syndrome may fall frequently and display exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia) as well.
When dystonia affects only one part of the body (e.g., a foot), it is referred to as focal dystonia. Dystonia in Segawa syndrome eventually progresses to legs and then the arms (multifocal dystonia), although it usually remains worse in the legs. In some cases, as a result of dystonia, abnormal curvature of the spine (lordosis) may occur. Without treatment, dystonia gradually progresses over time (approximately 10-15 years) and may eventually affect most of the body (generalized dystonia).
The dystonia and associated gait disturbances are usually worse during the afternoon, evening and at night than in the morning, a characteristic finding associated with Segawa syndrome called diurnal fluctuation. In some individuals the symptoms may be less severe in the morning than in the evening; in others the symptoms may be absent in morning and only present during the evening or at night. Although a key finding of Segawa syndrome, diurnal fluctuation does not occur in all cases. It is more lilely to occur in older individuals (adolescents and adults) than in young children. Dystonia and gait disturbances may also worsen following exercise or exertion.
Some affected children also develop stiffness (rigidity) and abnormal slowness of movement of the muscles of the arms and legs. The degree of stiffness and slowness of movement may vary greatly. Affected individuals may rapidly fatigue or require abnormal effort when attempting to perform certain tasks. During adolescence, some affected individuals develop a tremor that occurs when attempting to hold a certain position against gravity (postural tremor). Postural tremor usually affects one hand, although it may spread to all the arms and legs and even the neck. The progression of Segawa syndrome usually stops around the fourth decade.
When the onset of Segawa syndrome is during adolescence rather than childhood, the symptoms tend to be less severe. Generalized dystonia usually does not develop. When the onset of Segawa syndrome is during adulthood, the symptoms may resemble those found in Parkinson’s disease, which is sometimes referred to as parkinsonism. These symptoms include tremors, abnormal slowness of movement and an inability to remain in a stable or balanced position.
In some cases, individuals with Segawa syndrome may develop other forms of dystonia including those affecting the wrist (writer’s cramp), the neck (spasmodic torticollis) or the face and jaw (oromandibular dystonia). Some individuals may develop progressive weakness and increased muscle tone and stiffness (spastic paraplegia) or the spontaneous appearance and disappearance of dystonia and parkinsonism. In rare cases, mood or behavioral symptoms may occur including sleep problems, depression, anxiety or obsessive-compulsive disorder. Some researchers believe that mood and behavioral problems associated with Segawa syndrome are underreported.

