Senior-Løken Syndrome

synonyms:
juvenile nephronophthisis with leber amaurosisrenal dysplasia and retinal aplasiarenal dysplasia-blindness, hereditaryrenal-retinal dysplasiarenal-retinal syndromeLoken-Senior syndromeSLS

overview:
Senior-Løken syndrome (SLS) is a rare disorder belonging to the general group of rare diseases called ciliopathies that result in nephronophthisis and Leber congenital amaurosis. Nephronophthisis is the progressive wasting of the filtering unit of the kidney; it is characterized by cysts that develop in the kidneys during infancy or early childhood. Individuals will also develop symptoms of early-onset retinal dystrophy, a progressive retina disease that damages vision, within the first few years of life. Eventually the individual may experience renal failure and vision loss.
SLS is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. Currently, ten genes have been linked to the disorder.

symptoms:
Senior-Løken syndrome is a rare inherited disorder characterized by progressive kidney and eye problems.
Nephronophthisis
The onset of nephronophthisis usually occurs within the first year of life or early childhood; it is characterized by fluid-filled cysts that form in the kidneys and progressively worsen. The cysts can damage the kidneys and cause increased urine production (polyuria), weakness and fatigue, and excessive thirst (polydipsia). The kidney problems are present at birth in some families, but for other families, symptoms will develop very gradually before becoming apparent.
Renal ultrasound scans may help in the diagnosis showing kidneys of normal size, with increased echogenicity and corticomedullary cysts. As the disease progresses, kidneys become atrophic, and the cysts become more prominent. Progressive failure of kidney function occurs because of degeneration or loss of function of the small collecting tubes (tubules) in the kidney. This can cause chronic interstitial nephritis and uremia.
Chronic interstitial nephritis is a kidney syndrome in which the spaces between the tissue of the kidney (interstitial) become inflamed and structural changes occur. Eventually the patient may have symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, weight loss, fatigue, anemia and ultimately kidney failure.
Uremia is a condition that is characterized by a gradual increase of urea and other by-products of protein breakdown in the blood, causing a severe toxic condition. Normally, these by-products of protein breakdown would be passed in the urine.
Early-onset retinal dystrophies
Early-onset retinal dystrophies are a group of disorders characterized by the progressive atrophy of the retina, which is a tissue at the back of the eye that detects color and light. The most severe form is Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA). LCA causes vision problems such as sensitivity to light (photophobia), involuntary movements (nystagmus) and severe farsightedness (hyperopia). A decrease in visual responsiveness at birth is the first sign of this disorder with roving eye movements being apparent in the first few years of life.
In some patients with Senior-Løken syndrome the progressive atrophy of the retina of the eye may take a course similar to retinitis pigmentosa. This condition typically becomes apparent later in life with the earliest symptom being difficulty seeing in dimly lit places (night blindness). This is slowly followed by tunnel vision. The rate of progression can vary.
Other symptoms have been noted in some families such as diabetes insipidus, neurosensory hearing loss, muscular incoordination caused by disease of the cerebellum in the brain (cerebellar ataxia), abnormal formation of fibrous tissue in the liver (hepatic fibrosis) and skeletal abnormalities.

