Sennetsu Fever

synonyms:
Human Ehrlichial InfectionHuman Ehrlichial InfectionHuman Ehrlichial Infection, Sennetsu TypeSennetsu Type

overview:
Sennetsu Fever is a rare infectious disease belonging to a group of diseases known as the Human Ehrlichioses. These diseases are caused by bacteria belonging to the “Ehrlichia” family. Several forms of Human Ehrlichial infection have been identified including Sennetsu Fever, Human Monocytic Ehrlichiosis (HME), and Human Granulocytic Ehrlichiosis (HGE). Though caused by different strains of Ehrlichia bacteria, the disorders are all characterized by similar symptoms.
The symptoms of Sennetsu Fever may include a sudden high fever, headache, and muscle aches (myalgia) within a few weeks after initial infection. In some cases, affected individuals may also experience nausea, vomiting, and/or loss of appetite (anorexia). In addition, in many cases, abnormal laboratory findings may include a decrease in white blood cells (leukopenia) and/or an abnormal increase in the level of certain liver enzymes (hepatic transaminases). Sennetsu Fever is caused by the bacterium Ehrlichia sennetsu. The vector (or carrier) for this bacterium has not yet been determined; however, some researchers believe that infection may result from the ingestion of raw fish.

symptoms:
The symptoms of Sennetsu Fever, the first recognized form of Human Ehrlichiosis, tend to begin approximately two weeks after an individual has been infected with the bacterium Ehrlichia sennetsu.  Affected individuals may then experience severe headaches, muscle aches (myalgia), sudden fever, chills, swollen lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy), nausea, vomiting, and/or loss of appetite (anorexia).  In very rare cases, a rash may appear on the skin.
In the beginning of the illness, affected individuals may exhibit an abnormal decrease in the number of circulating white blood cells (leukopenia); later in the course of the infection, there may be an abnormal increase in the production of certain white blood cells (lymphocytosis) as the body’s immune system works to fight the infection.  Individuals with Sennetsu Fever may also exhibit an abnormally enlarged liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly) and a mild to moderate increase in the level of certain liver enzymes (hepatic transaminases).

