Sepiapterin Reductase Deficiency

synonyms:
Dopa-responsive dystonia due to sepiapterin reductase deficiencySRDSPR Deficiency

overview:
Summary
Sepiapterin reductase deficiency (SRD) is a rare genetic disorder that is characterized by abnormally low levels of certain neurotransmitters. Neurotransmitters are chemicals that modify, amplify or transmit nerve impulses from one nerve cell to another, enabling nerve cells to communicate. The severity of sepiapterin reductase deficiency can range from a mild movement disorder at one end to severe, progressive neurological disease at the other. Common symptoms include lack of muscle tone (hypotonia), drooling, loss of coordination, abnormal movements, delayed motor and language development (i.e. delays in reaching developmental milestones), and/or dystonia. Dystonia is a general term for a group of muscle disorders, generally characterized by involuntary muscle contractions that force the body into abnormal, sometimes painful, movements and positions (postures). The specific symptoms can vary dramatically from one person to another. Prompt diagnosis and treatment can reduce or potentially prevent severe, irreversible neurological damage. Children with sepiapterin reductase deficiency may show a dramatic response and sustained improvement when treated with levodopa. Levodopa is a chemical that is converted to dopamine, a brain chemical that serves as a neurotransmitter. Some individuals show benefit with treatment with addition of 5-HTP, a neurotransmitter precursor that is converted to serotonin. Sepiapterin reductase deficiency is caused by mutations in theSPRgene and is inherited as an autosomal recessive disorder.
Introduction
Sepiapterin reductase deficiency can be classified as a form of dystonia, a pediatric neurotransmitter disorder or a disorder of tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency. The disorder is sometimes referred to as a form of dopa-responsive dystonia. However, dystonia is not always present in infancy and may not be a universal symptom so that term may not apply to all cases.  The non-specific symptoms of this condition may be misdiagnosed as cerebral palsy.

symptoms:
Although researchers have been able to establish a clear syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about sepiapterin reductase deficiency is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified cases, the lack of large clinical studies, and the possibility of other genes influencing the disorder prevent physicians from developing an accurate picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Parents should talk to their children’s physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
The specific symptoms and severity associated with sepiapterin reductase deficiency can vary greatly from one person to another. Some individuals develop severe, disabling motor and cognitive deficits; others only experience mild symptoms that can go unnoticed, and may only be diagnosed after the disorder is identified in a more severely affected family member. Prompt diagnosis and early treatment of sepiapterin reductase deficiency is essential to reduce or potentially prevent progressive neurological damage.
Symptoms usually become apparent within the first year of life. Some infants may exhibit microcephaly, a condition defined as having a head circumference smaller than normally would be expected based on age and gender. Common symptoms include dystonia, delays in attaining developmental milestones (developmental delays) including delays in motor and speech development, reduced muscle tone (axial hypotonia), and abnormal movements of the eyes that can range from brief upward rolling of the eyes to oculogyric crises, in which the eyes roll upward for a sustained period of time.
In some cases, certain symptoms may become noticeably worse or more pronounced in the afternoon and evening than in the morning (diurnal fluctuation). Dystonia is not always present during infancy and may develop later in childhood. Some individuals may not develop dystonia or only experience mild dystonia that can go unnoticed in infancy. Generally, the most common symptoms in infancy are nonspecific and can occur in many different neurological disorders, making it difficult to obtain a proper diagnosis.
Some affected children develop intellectual disability while others develop mild or moderate learning disabilities. Sleep disturbances particularly excessive daytime sleepiness (hypersomnia), drooling, and psychological symptoms including anxiety, irritability, and hyperactivity may also occur.
Exaggerated reflexes (hyperreflexia) and excess muscle tone of the arms and legs so that they may be stiff and difficult to move (limb hypertonia) are also relatively common findings. Less common symptoms include difficulty speaking (dysarthria), abnormal tongue movements, and abnormalities of the autonomic nervous system. The autonomic nervous system controls involuntary or automatic body processes. Excessive sweating would be an example of an autonomic sign of the disorder.
Some individuals develop symptoms that resemble those seen in Parkinson’s disease, which is sometimes referred to as parkinsonism. These symptoms include tremors, abnormal slowness of movement (bradykinesia), muscle stiffness or rigidity, and an inability to use facial muscles to express emotions (masked facies).

