SETBP1 Haploinsufficiency Disorder

synonyms:
SETBP1-related disorderSETBP1-related intellectual disabilitySETBP1-related developmental delaySETBP1 disorderMRD29SETBP1-HD

overview:
Summary

SETBP1 haploinsufficiency disorder (SETBP1-HD) is an extremely rare genetic neurodevelopmental disorder in which there is a variation (mutation) in the SETBP1 gene. Variations in theSETBP1gene can potentially cause a variety of signs and symptoms; how the disorder affects one child can be very different from how it affects another. Neurodevelopmental disorders are ones that impair or alter the growth and development of the brain and the central nervous system. Common symptoms include varying degrees of intellectual disability, delays in reaching developmental milestones (developmental delays), delays or difficulty in being able to speak (speech delays) and distinctive facial features. In most instances, variations in theSETBP1gene occur spontaneously and there is no family history of the disorder (de novo variations). Treatment is based on the specific symptoms present in each individual.

symptoms:
Although researchers have been able to establish a clear syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about the disorder is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified patients, the lack of large clinical studies and the possibility of other genes influencing the disorder prevent physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Parents should talk to their children’s physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
The majority of children with SETBP1-HD have intellectual disability that can range from mild to moderate to severe. The degree of intellectual disability may be hard to determine at first, because other symptoms may make evaluation difficult. Most children experience delays in reaching developmental milestones like sitting up or crawling. Speech delays are also common and can be significant. The degree of speech difficulty can vary. Some children may have problems moving the muscles needed to speak and forming the mouth movements needed to speak (apraxia of speech) while others may not speak at all (nonverbal).
Additional symptoms include diminished muscle tone (hypotonia) so that infants may appear ‘floppy,’ and, less often, seizures. Other children may have increased muscle tone (hypertonia) so that muscles are stiff and hard to move. Some individuals may have difficulty planning and processing motor tasks (dyspraxia). Motor tasks are those that require the movement and coordination of the muscles. Affected individuals may experience fine and gross motor delays. Fine motor skills are those that require small movements involving the hands and wrists. Gross motor skills are those that require whole body movements and involve large muscles.
Some individuals with SETBP1-HD have behavioral issues including attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and autism-like traits such as repetitive behaviors, fixation on objects, anxiety and poor social skills. Repetitive behaviors can include stereotypic hand movements, which include hand clapping, hand flapping, flicking hands, hand washing, fingers crossing, and frequent hand-to-mouth movements. Some children may show aggression or self-injury. Sleep disturbances, vision issues, digestive issues, and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) have also been reported in some individuals with SETBP1-HD.
Affected individuals may have distinctive facial features including a long, pointed chin, which contributes to the face appearing longer than normal, mild drooping of the upper eyelid (mild ptosis), a prominent forehead, sparse eyebrows, a thin upper lip and abnormal fullness of the area around the eyes (periorbital fullness). Misalignment of the eyes (strabismus) has also been reported. The skull may appear shorter (brachycephaly) or longer (dolichocephaly) than usual.

