SETD1B-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder

synonyms:
SETD1B-NDD

overview:
SETD1B-related neurodevelopmental disorder (SETD1B-NDD) is thought to be caused by disease-causing changes (pathogenic variants) in theSETD1Bgene. Affected patients may have developmental delays or intellectual disability, seizures, autism spectrum disorder or autism-like behaviors and other behavioral challenges. Speech disorders, seizures and autism-like features are some of the most common features observed in patients withSETD1B-NDD.
There is no curative treatment forSETD1B-NDD. Rather, the goals of management are to support young patients in their development and communication skills and ensure families have adequate social supports. In addition, feeding difficulties, seizures and other medical concerns may need to be managed as they arise. In general, when a patient is diagnosed withSETD1B-NDD, it is recommended that at minimum, patients be referred to a geneticist or genetic counselor, neurologist and developmental pediatrician.

symptoms:
•	Developmental delay (including speech delays/disorders)•	Intellectual disability (ID)•	Seizures (especially seizures that are difficult to treat)•	Autism-spectrum disorder or autism-like behaviours•	Other behavioral concerns (hyperactivity, aggression, anxiety, sleep disorders)
Developmental delay and Intellectual DisabilityMany individuals withSETD1B-NDD have developmental delays. One of the most common affected areas is speech, with speech delays and language disorders reported in most patients. There is a range in severity of delay; some patients show speech delay but catch up later, though some show severe speech impairment. Some patients are non-verbal, or only speak single words at the time of their last reported assessment. Other developmental delays can include delays in gross motor skills, like rolling from back-to-front or front-to-back as an infant, sitting independently, walking or running. There are very few detailed reports on fine motor skills (such as picking up food or using a pencil) among individuals withSETD1B-NDD. A small number of patients have also had developmental regression, or loss of developmental milestones; in these patients, speech was affected, and patients lost previously acquired verbal skills or vocabulary.
When diagnosed with intellectual disability (ID), most individuals seem to be affected to a mild or moderate degree. At least two patients have been reported to have severe ID. However, at least two patients reported in the medical literature had typical development (they were meeting developmental milestones) at the time of their assessment.
SeizuresSeizures are common in patients withSETD1B-NDD, and often present at a young age. Many different types of seizures have been reported, but in most reports, seizures occur daily and change in character as children get older. Seizures may worsen over time, or be difficult to treat, requiring trials of different medications. No universal anti-seizure treatment has been reported to be effective in all individuals.
Other Neurologic SymptomsA small number of individuals have been reported to have feeding difficulties early in childhood. Some patients have also been reported to have low muscle tone (hypotonia) and one adult had a small head circumference (microcephaly).
Behavioral DifferencesMost patients described in the literature have either autism spectrum disorder or autistic features without a formal diagnosis. Other behavioral concerns reported include hyperactivity, aggression, anxiety, sleep disturbance and more rarely, obsessive-compulsive behavior.
OtherSome patients also had abnormalities on brain MRI (a type of head imaging), subtle facial features different from other family members, eye abnormalities or other medical conditions (for example, one patient had a congenital heart abnormality and another was born with abnormal kidneys). However, there was no recognizable pattern of facial features or common diagnosis among the reported patients.
Variants in theSETD1Bgene have been reported in the tissue found in cancerous tumours; laboratory studies have also shown thatSETD1Bvariants may play a role in endometrial cancer and some types of blood cancer. However, in these cases, the pathogenic variants occur in the tumor tissues only (this is called a somatic mutation) as opposed to in every cell in the body (germline mutation; this is the process that occurs inSETD1B-NDD). To date, there are no reports of patients with germlineSETD1Bvariants (e.g., patients withSETD1B-NDD) who had cancers diagnosed in childhood. Among the patients reported thus far, only one individual has been reported to have a malignancy, and this was a bowel cancer diagnosed at age 30 years.

