Setleis Syndrome

synonyms:
Bitemporal Forceps Marks SyndromeFacial Ectodermal DysplasiaFFDD Type IIFocal Facial Dermal Dysplasia Type II

overview:
Setleis syndrome is an extremely rare inherited disorder that belongs to a group of diseases known as ectodermal dysplasias. Ectodermal dysplasias typically affect the hair, teeth, nails, and/or skin. Setleis syndrome is characterized by distinctive abnormalities of the facial area that may be apparent at birth (congenital). Most affected infants have multiple, scar-like, circular depressions on both temples (bitemporal). These marks closely resemble those made when forceps are used to assist delivery. In addition, affected infants may have puffy, wrinkled skin around the eyes (periorbital) and/or abnormalities of the eyelashes, eyebrows, and eyelids. Infants with Setleis syndrome may be missing eyelashes on both the upper and lower lids, or they may have multiple rows of lashes on the upper lids but none on the lower lids. In addition, in some cases, the bridge of the nose may appear flat, while the tip may appear unusually rounded (bulbous). Affected infants often have loose, excessive (redundant) skin, particularly in the area of the nose and the chin. Due to such facial abnormalities, infants with Setleis syndrome may have an aged and/or “leonine” (lion-like) appearance. The range and severity of symptoms may vary from case to case. Most cases of Setleis syndrome are thought to be inherited as an autosomal recessive genetic trait.

symptoms:
Setleis syndrome, an extremely rare inherited disorder, belongs to a group of diseases known as ectodermal dysplasias that typically affect the hair, teeth, nails, and/or skin.  Setleis syndrome is characterized by distinctive abnormalities of the facial area.  The range and severity of symptoms may vary from case to case.
Infants with Setleis syndrome have multiple, scar-like, circular depressions on both temples (bitemporal) that strongly resemble the marks made during a forceps delivery.  According to some researchers, these “forceps marks” may represent aplasia cutis congenita, a rare condition characterized by failure of development of skin and hair in certain areas (localized), most often on the scalp; absence of certain structures just below the skin’s surface (e.g., sweat glands); and/or the development of scar tissue or a thin membrane over the affected area.  For example, in some infants with Setleis syndrome, the outermost layer of skin (epidermis) in the temple area may be abnormally thin and the hair follicles, sweat glands, and sebaceous glands normally located within the thick inner layer of skin (dermis) may be absent.  The sebaceous glands produce a thick, oily substance (sebum) that helps the skin retain body heat and prevent the evaporation of sweat.
In addition, in most infants with Setleis syndrome the skin around the eyes (periorbital) is puffy and wrinkled, giving them an aged appearance.  In some cases, affected infants may also have an abnormally prominent forehead (frontal bossing) and eyebrows that grow upward and outward, but have sparse side growth.  In some cases, as a result of characteristic facial features, affected infants may have a coarse or “leonine” (lion-like) facial appearance.
In most cases, infants with Setleis syndrome also have abnormalities of the eyelashes such as absence of the eyelashes on both the upper and lower lids or multiple rows of eyelashes on the upper lids (distichiasis) and none on the lower lids (astichiasis).  In some cases, abnormalities of the eyelashes may lead to redness, inflammation, and/or swelling of the eyelids with scaly skin forming at the ends of the eyelids and flakes of discharge collecting in the corners or on the lashes.  Eventually, infections may occur at the base of the lashes (blepharitis), and the eyes themselves may become red.
In many cases, affected infants may have other abnormalities affecting the eyes.  For example, the transparent, thin membrane that protects and helps lubricate the eyelids and whites of the eyes (conjunctiva) may become inflamed (conjunctivitis).  In some cases, infants with Setleis syndrome may have downward slanting eyelid slits (palpebral fissures), excess folds of skin on either side of the nose that cover the eyes’ inner corners (epicanthal folds), or, in rare cases, crossed eyes (strabismus).
Infants with Setleis syndrome may also have additional abnormalities of the facial area.  The bridge of the nose may appear flat, while the tip of the nose may appear abnormally rounded (bulbous).  In some cases, the wall that divides the two chambers of the nose (nasal septum) may extend below the nostrils (alae nasae).  In most cases, infants  have a downturned mouth, an abnormally prominent upper lip, and/or unusually thick lips.  In some cases, abnormal thickness of the lips may be due, in part, to increased mobility of the skin.  In addition, affected children may have loose, excessive (redundant) facial skin, and the skin of the nose and the chin may appear abnormally flexible or “rubbery.”  Some affected individuals may also have small, malformed ears and/or an abnormal groove or furrow in the chin (cleft chin).  Facial abnormalities may become less pronounced as affected children age.
In addition, many individuals with Setleis syndrome have distinctive abnormalities involving hair growth.  Affected individuals may have thin scalp hair, abnormal bald patches on the scalp (alopecia), and/or a low frontal hairline.
In a few cases, children with Setleis syndrome have additional abnormalities.  For example, they may have patches of skin that appear darker or lighter in various areas of the body (hyper- or hypopigmentation), such as light brown “coffee-colored” discolorations (cafe-au-lait spots) or patches of skin that lack color (vitiligo).  In some cases, affected individuals have abnormal creases or lines on the palms of the hands (palmar creases).
Some researchers believe that Setleis syndrome is a form of focal facial dermal dysplasia (FFDD), which has been described as a group of rare inherited disorders that may be characterized by the presence of scar-like depressions on the temples at birth, potentially in association with additional facial abnormalities.  For more information, please see the “Related Disorders” section of this report.

