Severe Chronic Neutropenia

synonyms:
SCN

overview:
Severe chronic neutropenia (SCN) is a rare blood disorder characterized by abnormally low levels of certain white blood cells (neutrophils) in the bloodstream (neutropenia) not explained by medication use, infections or another underlying health condition like blood cancers or systemic autoimmune diseases associated with neutropenia. Neutrophils play an essential role in fighting bacterial infections by surrounding and destroying invading bacteria (phagocytosis). Symptoms associated with severe chronic neutropenia include recurring fevers, mouth sores (ulcers), inflammation of the tissues that surround and support the teeth (periodontitis) and inflammation of the sinuses (sinusitis), throat (pharyngitis) and/or ear (otitis). Due to low levels of neutrophils, affected individuals may be more susceptible to recurring bacterial infections that, in some patients, may result in life-threatening complications. SCN may last for months or years and can affect both children and adults. Clinicians recognize three forms of the disorder: congenital, autoimmune and idiopathic neutropenia. The term idiopathic neutropenia is used when severe chronic neutropenia occurs for unknown reasons.

symptoms:
Symptoms and physical findings associated with severe chronic neutropenia vary greatly depending on how low the level of neutrophils in the blood falls. As earlier noted, the three main subdivisions of severe chronic neutropenia are congenital, autoimmune and idiopathic.
The congenital forms of severe chronic neutropenia are often the most severe of all types of SCN and can be detected by doing a blood count in infancy or during early childhood.
Findings common to all congenital forms of SCN include fevers; ear infections; acute inflammation of the lungs (pneumonia); skin infections; and inflammation of the delicate mucous membranes that line the mouth (stomatitis), the gums (gingivitis) and/or the tissue that surrounds and supports the teeth (periodontitis). Recurrent oral ulcerations are also common. Some patients may experience premature loss of teeth.
Individuals with congenital forms of severe chronic neutropenia are especially susceptible to various bacterial infections that affect the skin, digestive (gastrointestinal) tract and respiratory system, with the source of bacteria usually from the patient’s own skin and gut flora. Such bacterial infections vary in severity and, in some patients may result in life-threatening complications. Importantly, patients with congenital neutropenia still have normal immunity to viruses and so are no more susceptible to viral infections than the average person and can receive all immunizations, including live virus vaccines.
Patients with congenital forms of SCN are at greater risk of developing leukemia than are other people, especially in cases associated with certain gene mutations and cases that require higher medication doses. Yearly bone marrow examinations where chromosomes are examined can detect leukemia at its earliest development.
In cyclic neutropenia, a rare form of congenital neutronia, the primary finding is a periodic severe decrease in the levels of neutrophils. In most patients, episodes of severe neutropenia recur on an average of every 21 days (hence “cyclic”) and may last for approximately three to six days. The cycling period usually remains constant and consistent among affected individuals, but the severity of the low point may improve with age. Although other forms of neutropenia can show striking variability of neutrophil counts, only cyclic neutropenia causes such consistent, lifelong cycling of neutrophils, and often other types of blood cells.
Autoimmune neutropenia usually strikes children between the ages of 6 months and 4 years and is the most common form of SCN in this age group. Less frequently, adults may develop this disorder, with a peak incidence from 20 to 30 years of age. This disorder is characterized by the presence of neutrophil-specific antibodies in the blood that increase the rate of destruction of the patient’s neutrophils. Although the blood level of neutrophils can be very low in children with autoimmune neutropenia, they are only rarely affected by severe bacterial infections and neutropenia usually resolves without treatment several months to years after onset. Unfortunately, spontaneous remission of autoimmune SCN is not at all common in the adult-onset version but clinical symptoms are usually mild and only occasionally severe. Other potential findings with autoimmune neutropenia in adults are low red blood cells (anemia) and platelet levels (thrombocytopenia). Autoimmune neutropenia is distinct from congenital neutropenia in terms of the cause of neutropenia. The congenital neutropenias arise from the failure of the bone marrow to produce adequate numbers of neutrophils which circulate in the blood. Autoimmune neutropenias, due to destruction of neutrophils in the blood, usually feature a reserve pool of neutrophils in the bone marrow and good delivery of neutrophils to sites of bacterial invation, leading to the observed low incidence of serious infection.
Chronic idiopathic neutropenia refers to a group of disorders that cannot be classified into one of the other categories of neutropenia. The exact cause of these disorders is not known (idiopathic), but most likely represent an autoimmune process in many patients. In most patients, the symptoms associated with idiopathic neutropenia are less severe than those associated with congenital neutropenia and may not require specific treatment. However, in some severely affected patients with idiopathic neutropenia, infections may result in life-threatening complications.

