Shashi-Pena Syndrome

synonyms:
ASXL2/Shashi-Pena syndrome

overview:
Summary
Shashi-Pena syndrome is a rare multiple malformation syndrome that presents at birth with characteristic facial features, enlarged head circumference and other characteristic findings such as a birthmark above the bridge of the nose (glabellar nevus flammeus), along with low muscle tone and global developmental delay. Certain features such as epilepsy occur in some affected individuals, but not all. The condition is caused by changes (mutations) in theASXL2gene that have occurred as new mutations (de novo) in affected individuals. The condition is thought to follow an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. Treatment is targeted to the individual symptoms, and consists of supportive care for the complications, such as cardiology follow up in case of congenital heart disease and developmental therapies.
Introduction
Shashi-Pena syndrome was initially described in 2016 by Dr. Vandana Shashi and Dr. Loren Pena in a group of six children who had overlapping facial features and clinical findings. The physical findings were most prominent in the first few years of life. TheASXL2gene had not previously been associated with a disease in humans.

symptoms:
Patients affected with Shashi-Pena syndrome have low muscle tone (hypotonia) and a characteristic facial appearance consisting of wide-set eyes (hypertelorism) that are also prominent, droopy eyelids (ptosis), a red or pink birthmark above the bridge of the nose (glabellar nevus flammeus), low set and posteriorly rotated ears, a small mouth and enlarged head size (macrocephaly). Feeding difficulties early in life are common. Some children have low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) early in life, and rarely this can become a persistent complication. The early hypotonia can evolve into subsequent delays in gross motor skills that manifest as delayed walking. There is also a delay in speech and behavioral problems that can include aggressive behavior, attention deficit and autistic features. Some patients have capillary malformations in addition to the glabellar nevus flammeus, skeletal abnormalities such as an advanced bone age, curvature of the spine (scoliosis and kyphosis), overgrowth, contractures of certain joints, deep palmar and plantar creases and congenital heart defects such as atrial septal defects. Some patients may have seizures while having a fever and epilepsy may sometimes develop. Several patients have had brain abnormalities consisting of enlarged ventricles and loss of cerebral white matter.

