Sheehan Syndrome

synonyms:
postpartum hypopituitarismpostpartum panhypopituitarismpostpartum panhypopituitary syndromepostpartum pituitary necrosisSS

overview:
Excessive blood loss during or after delivery of a baby may affect the function of the pituitary gland, leading to a form of maternal hypopituitarism known as Sheehan syndrome (SS). Such extensive bleeding may reduce the blood flow to the pituitary gland causing the pituitary cells to be damaged or die (necrosis). Thus, the production of the usual pituitary hormones will be reduced, perhaps by a significant amount. During pregnancy the pituitary gland will enlarge and may double in size. At this time the gland is especially vulnerable to a severe drop in blood pressure (sometimes called “shock”) and excessive maternal bleeding may induce the “shock” and the damage to the cells of the gland. At that time the amount of hormones produced by the pituitary may be decreased giving rise to the symptoms associated with hypopituitarism. There appear to be two forms of the disorder: a chronic form and an acute form, depending on the amount of damage to the gland’s cells. The acute form reflects considerable damage so that symptoms become apparent soon after delivery. In chronic cases, the volume of damage is much less, and symptoms may not appear for months or years after delivery.

symptoms:
The clinical features of Sheehan syndrome are highly variable and depend on the degree of failure of secretion of pituitary hormones including:
•	Prolactin, the hormone that stimulates lactation•	Gonadotrophins (luteinizing hormone [LH] and follicle stimulating hormone [FSH]), which regulate the function of the ovaries•	TSH, which stimulates the thyroid gland•	ACTH, adrenocorticotrophin, which stimulates the adrenal cortex•	Growth hormone (GH)
How much pituitary tissue is killed, and by how much the hormone levels in the circulation are decreased, determine what happens to the mother. Patients with the chronic form have a smaller proportion of the pituitary tissue damaged and may not develop symptoms until weeks or even years after the birth.
In its most severe form, the condition is associated with failure of lactation after a woman has a baby. Menstruation does not begin again, sexual interest (libido) is diminished, hair in the armpits (axilla) slowly disappears, breasts diminish in size (atrophy) and the lining of the vagina thins, sometimes causing pain with intercourse. For some women, menstrual periods do recur, and subsequent pregnancies have been reported.
The characteristic symptoms (fatigue, dry skin, constipation, weight gain, sluggishness) of hypothyroidism usually develop gradually. Severe ACTH deficiency is associated with fatigue, chronic hypotension with fainting, and the inability to respond to stress. If these symptoms occur, they usually appear within weeks or months after the baby is born.Since SS is a disorder affecting adults, the effects of growth hormone deficiency are limited to some loss of muscle strength, increased body fat and increased insulin sensitivity.
The less common acute or more severe form is potentially very dangerous. In these cases, less than 10 percent of the normal volume of pituitary tissue remains. Patients may present with persistent low blood pressure (hypotension), irregular and fast heartbeat (tachycardia), as well as failure to lactate and low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) immediately following delivery.
In both the chronic and acute forms, there may be signs of diabetes insipidus (DI) such as abnormal thirst for and intake of water, as well as high volume of output of urine.

