Short QT Syndrome

synonyms:
SQTSSQT

overview:
Summary
Short QT syndrome (SQTS) is an extremely rare but life-threatening familial disorder characterized by an abnormally short QT interval on the electrocardiogram (ECG), indicating that the heart muscle takes less time than usual to recharge between beats. SQTS increases the risk of an abnormal rate or rhythm of the heartbeat (cardiac arrhythmia), and sudden cardiac death (SCD). SQTS is a “channelopathy” caused by changes (mutations) in genes encoding proteins forming potassium or calcium ion channels (pores) on the cardiac, and even neuronal, cell membranes that are essential for the heart’s electro-mechanical function. The syndrome was first identified in 2000; since then, only about 250 cases have been reported in the scientific literature. Families with SQTS usually have incomplete penetrance, which means that children of an affected parent who inherit the gene mutation may or may not develop the disease. The specific symptoms, onset of symptoms and severity vary from one sibling to another. Accordingly, although SQTS may be diagnosed in children if they show clear cardiac symptoms, or if family history is suspected, it is difficult to establish a specific age of onset. Consequently, the incidence of SQTS in the general population remains unclear. In cases in which the genetic cause is known (20-30% of cases) the mutation is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. However, the mechanisms that link the gene mutation to the arrhythmias and SCD are unknown, and the treatment depends on the signs and symptoms in each individual patient.
Introduction
Short QT syndrome (SQTS) receives its specific name because on the electrocardiogram (ECG), its main characteristic is the presence of an abnormally short QT interval. The ECG is widely used by cardiologists to diagnose heart rhythm and conduction problems associated with cardiovascular conditions. Every time the heart beats, electrical currents flow through it, the ECG records the changes in voltage associated with such currents versus time. By placing electrodes at specific locations of the body surface and connecting them to an ECG machine, an expert can identify a wide variety of cardiac alterations, including abnormal heart rate and rhythm. Normally on ECG, each beat is composed by specific voltage waves, labelled P, Q, R, S and T, and organized as complexes, segments, and intervals with known amplitudes and durations. They indicate the local excitation and recovery as the electrical wave moves from the atria to the ventricles of the heart. The P wave represents the excitation (depolarization) of the atria; the QRS complex represents the depolarization of the ventricles and the T wave indicates the recovery (repolarization) from ventricular excitation. The time interval between the onset of the QRS and the end of the T wave is the QT interval. In humans, the QT interval normally lasts between 0.35 and 0.45 seconds, which is optimal to allow the ventricles to contract and pump the blood to the rest of the body. Since the QT interval normally varies depending on the heart rate, a mathematical formula is used to correct the QT interval (QTc) for changes in this parameter. In patients with SQTS, ventricular repolarization occurs too early and consequently, their QT interval will be too brief. Nowadays, a QTc interval less than 0.34 seconds is sufficient to suspect SQTS.
Although the link between a short QT interval and SCD had previously been suspected, Gussak, I. et al. described the SQTS in 2000 in a family with abnormally short QTc and other cardiac complications. Thereafter, SQTS was considered a new clinical entity associated with cardiac arrhythmia and increased risk of SCD but unknown mechanism. The long QT syndrome (LQTS), another channelopathy in which patients have a QTc interval longer than 0.45 seconds, was described several years earlier and its genetic basis was already known to be associated with mutations in genes for sodium, potassium and calcium ion channel proteins. Hence, investigators theorized that perhaps mutations provoking SQTS, while different from LQTS, could occur in the same or related genes. The first time SQTS was linked to a genetic cause was in 2004, when Brugada, R. et al. screened candidate genes encoding ion channels contributing to the repolarization phase of the cellular equivalent of the QT interval, the ventricular action potential. They identified a mutation inKCNH2, the gene coding the membrane potassium channel HERG responsible for positive repolarizing current, in two families with history of short QTc interval, arrhythmias and SCD. However, with time, it has become apparent that SQTS is a genetic disease caused by mutations in several different genes. Much effort has been devoted since then to the study of the causes of SQTS to include these genes in genetic screening panels with the aim of getting an early and appropriate diagnosis.

symptoms:
The extremely abbreviated QTc interval that characterizes the ECG of SQTS patients is associated with defects in cardiac electrical function including life-threatening arrhythmias that may appear at rest or during exercise with no apparent initiating cause.
The median age of appearance is 30 years, though it ranges widely, from a few months to 60 years of life. Moreover, the clinical presentation of the syndrome is diverse due to its variable expressivity even among members of the same family. Nevertheless, in up to 20% of patients, the first symptoms are usually: cardiac arrest (up to 40%), palpitations (30%) and syncope (25%). Atrial fibrillation has been reported in up to 80% of SQTS patients including children, adolescents and young adults. However, frequently, ventricular fibrillation and SCD can be the first manifestation, a fatal event that may have devastating impact on the families and the community. Moreover, since some of the ionic channels related to SQTS are also present in neurons, there are subtypes of SQTS that include epilepsy and autism as well.
All the above signs of the syndrome are associated with a QTc interval briefer than 0.34 seconds in patients with structurally normal hearts, but the precise link between the electrical abnormality and the fatal event has not been established.

