SHORT Syndrome

synonyms:
Aarskog-Ose-Pande syndromelipodystrophy-Rieger anomaly-diabetes syndromeRieger anomaly-partial lipodystrophy syndromePIK3R1-associated syndromic insulin resistance with lipoatrophy

overview:
SHORT syndrome is a rare condition described by RJ Gorlin et al in 1975 based on the striking physical features of two infants born to unaffected parents. Over time, additional individuals have been described and the clinical definition of SHORT syndrome has been expanded. Each letter of SHORT syndrome represents one of the common findings in affected persons:
(S) = short stature
(H) = hyperextensibility of joints and/or hernia (inguinal)
(O) = ocular depression (deep-set eyes)
(R) = Rieger anomaly (defective development of the eye that often leads to glaucoma)
(T) = teething delay
Not all of these five features are required for diagnosis of SHORT syndrome.Other characteristics common in SHORT syndrome are a triangular face, small chin with a dimple, a loss of fat under the skin (lipodystrophy), hearing loss, intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) (poor fetal growth and low weight) and delayed speech.

symptoms:
SHORT syndrome is a disorder that affects multiple organ systems. This condition was initially characterized by short stature, joints that stretch more than usual (hyperextensibility), a particular type of hernia in which the intestine protrudes through a weak spot in the abdominal muscles (inguinal hernia), deep set eyes (ocular depression), defective development of the anterior chamber of the eye that can lead to glaucoma (Rieger anomaly) and delayed eruption of teeth.
In addition to the classic features, other characteristics that are common in SHORT syndrome include a triangular face, small chin with a dimple, abnormal position of the ears and hearing loss. Loss of fat under the skin (lipodystrophy) is also common, causing difficulty gaining weight and a translucent appearance to the skin. This typically presents first in the face followed by the chest and upper extremities in the first few years of development. Often, the lower extremities are spared from lipodystrophy, but overall body appearance is thin with low body mass index (BMI). Some affected individuals have speech delay and other developmental delays but intelligence is normal. In addition to teething delay, development of further dental issues is likely. Insulin resistance is common in mid-childhood to adolescence, often progressing into diabetes mellitus by early adulthood. Babies with SHORT syndrome are usually born at or slightly before term, but often have low birth weight, small head circumference and shortened length. Individuals with SHORT syndrome are thought to have a normal life-expectancy.

