Short Bowel Syndrome

synonyms:
SBS

overview:
Summary

Short bowel syndrome is a complex disease that occurs due to the physical loss or the loss of function of a portion of the small and/or large intestine. Consequently, individuals with short bowel syndrome often have a reduced ability to absorb nutrients such as fats, carbohydrates (sugars) vitamins, minerals, trace elements and fluids (malabsorption). The specific symptoms and severity of short bowel syndrome vary from one person to another. Diarrhea is common, often severe and can cause dehydration, which can even be life threatening. Short bowel syndrome can lead to malnutrition, unintended weight loss and additional symptoms may be due to the loss of essential vitamins and minerals. There is no cure, but the disorder usually can be treated effectively. However, in some cases, short bowel syndrome can lead to severe, disabling and life-threatening complications. Short bowel syndrome is most commonly associated with the surgical removal (resection) of half or more of the small intestine. Such surgery is performed to treat intestinal diseases such as Crohn’s disease, injury or trauma to the small bowel, or congenital birth defects. The presence or absence of the large intestine (colon) also plays an important role in the genesis and/or treatment of the short bowel syndrome.

Introduction

Through the years, the definition of short bowel syndrome in the medical literature has varied. This has led to confusion. Although some medical sources seem to reserve the name short bowel syndrome for cases caused by surgical resection of a portion of the small intestine, other sources have noted that the disorder can result from any disease, injury or condition that hinders or prevents the proper function of the small intestine even if the length of the bowel is unaffected. Short bowel syndrome may be classified as a cause or subcategory of intestinal failure. In rare cases, infants are born with a short bowel (congenital short bowel syndrome). Although these congenital cases are often associated with malrotation of the small intestine, the exact cause of congenital short bowel syndrome is unknown.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of short bowel syndrome can vary greatly depending upon the length and function of the remaining or undamaged portion of the small intestine. Because short bowel syndrome can vary so greatly, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals or parents of affected children or infants should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
The small intestine is a long, narrow, accordion-like tube that extends from the stomach to the large intestine. It is the area where most of the digestion and absorption of nutrients occurs within the body. When the small intestine is damaged or lost (e.g., due to surgery), affected individuals may lose the ability to absorb sufficient amounts of water, vitamins and other nutrients from food.
The small intestine is divided into three main sections: the duodenum, the jejunum and the ileum. In the adult, the normal length of the small intestine is estimated at 600cm (235 inches), and the colon is about 150cm (60 inches). Individuals who have only 150-200cm of the small intestine and lack a colon may have significant fluid and nutrient losses that often require the use of intravenous fluid and/or nutrients. These sections have different functions and are associated with the absorption of specific nutrients. For example, the duodenum is the first portion of the small intestine (about 30cm or 12 inches) and is connected to the stomach. The duodenum continues the breakdown of food particles from the stomach (the process of digestion) which prepares particles to be absorbed by the intestinal lining. The duodenum also absorbs iron, calcium and magnesium. The jejunum is the middle portion (mid-gut) of the small intestine and is where most nutrient absorption occurs. It is about 200cm (~80 inches) in length. Carbohydrates, fats, proteins, and vitamins are all absorbed in the jejunum. The ileum is the last portion of the small intestine and is connected to the large intestine. Some products of digestion that are not absorbed by the jejunum may also be absorbed by the ileum as this area can adapt to compensate for many of the jejunal functions. The reverse is not true. As there are special binding sites for the absorption of bile acids and vitamin B12 found only in the final portion of the ileum, referred to as the terminal ileum.
Although symptoms of short bowel syndrome vary, diarrhea is common. Diarrhea can be severe and can cause dehydration, unintended weight loss, a general feeling of poor health (malaise), lethargy and eventually malnutrition. Additional symptoms include cramping, fatigue, weakness, bloating and heartburn. Individuals may have pale, greasy stools that contain excess amounts of fat (steatorrhea). Short bowel syndrome may cause malnutrition. Malnourishment can result in swelling (distention) of the abdomen, dehydration, loss of muscle mass, dry, flaky skin, swelling of the tissues of the legs and feet (peripheral edema), and weakening or wasting away of the muscle of the temples (temporal wasting) giving the temples a hollow appearance. Short bowel syndrome can lead to poor growth in infants and children due to undernutrition and lack of the proper building blocks for normal growth and development.
A wide variety of additional symptoms may be associated with short bowel syndrome depending upon the failure to absorb sufficient levels of certain vitamins or minerals. Some examples of vitamin and mineral deficiencies and their potential symptoms are listed below.
Deficiency of vitamin A can be associated with difficulties seeing at night (night blindness) and abnormal dryness and thickening of the conjunctiva and cornea (xerophthalmia). Affected individuals may develop corneal ulcerations. It also plays a role in healthy skin maintenance.
Deficiency of vitamin B can lead to a variety of conditions include inflammation of the mouth (stomatitis) and tongue (glossitis), dry scaling of the lip (cheilosis), swelling due to fluid accumulation (edema), low levels of circulating red blood cells (anemia), weakness of certain eye muscles (ophthalmoplegia), irregular heartbeats (tachycardia or bradycardia), damage to the nerves outside the central nervous system (peripheral neuropathy) and seizures.
Deficiency of vitamin D in children can result in rickets, a condition characterized by bow deformities of the legs, pain in the legs and progressive softening of the bone structure. In children, growth rates may also be slow, ultimately resulting in short stature. Affected individuals may be prone to fractures due to weakening of the bones (osteoporosis). Vitamin D deficiency can cause low calcium blood levels, which can also be associated with intermittent muscle spasms (tetany) and an abnormal sensation on the skin such as a feeling of being on “pins and needles” (paresthesias).
Deficiency of vitamin E can result in paresthesias, tetany, loss of voluntary muscle coordination (ataxia), abnormal swelling due to fluid accumulation (edema), depressed deep tendon reflexes, and vision problems.
Deficiency of vitamin K can cause prolonged bleeding and a tendency to bruise easily. Affected individuals may develop small red or purple pinprick-sized spots on the skin due to bleeding (petechiae), discoloration of the skin due to bleeding underneath the surface of the skin (ecchymoses) and a rash of purple spots on the skin due to internal bleeding (purpura).
Iron deficiency may result in an unhealthy pale appearance or skin tone (pallor), inflammation of the tongue (glossitis), and abnormally spooned nails. In severe cases, it can cause weakness, fatigue, difficulty concentrating and short of breath upon exertion (dyspnea).
Zinc deficiency can result in information of the mucous membrane of the mouth (stomatitis), patchy areas of hair loss (alopecia), poor wound healing and a reddened, scaly skin rash.
Overgrowth of normal bacteria in the small intestine is common in children with short bowel syndrome, especially if they have an area of dilated small intestine with poor motility, which often happens in affected individuals. Exacerbation of bloating, diarrhea, and more severe nutrient malabsorption may occur in this setting.

