Shprintzen Goldberg Syndrome

synonyms:
SGSMarfanoid-craniosynostosis syndromeShprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndromecraniosynostosis with arachnodactyly and abdominal herniasmarfanoid disorder with craniosynostosis type 1Shprintzen-Goldberg marfanoid syndrome

overview:
Summary
Shprintzen Goldberg syndrome (SGS) is an extremely rare connective tissue disorder characterized by craniofacial differences as well as skeletal and cardiovascular deformities. Patients with SGS generally present with premature fusion of cranial bones in infancy (craniosynostosis), widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), distinctive facial features, receding chin (retrognathia), small lower jaw (micrognathia), highly-arched roof of mouth (high, narrow palate), tall skull (dolichocephaly), low-set and rotated ears, elongated fingers (arachnodactyly) and limbs, flat feet (pes planus), low muscle tone (hypotonia), umbilical and abdominal hernias, intellectual disability and heart problems. In addition, individuals with SGS may have brain anomalies including fluid build-up in the brain (hydrocephalus), dilation of the lateral ventricles, and Chiari 1 malformation, a condition where tissue at the base of the brain extends into the spinal cord.
Heart defects found in patients with SGS may include regurgitation or prolapse of heart valves and aortic root aneurysm. SGS is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern and typically caused by disease-causing (pathogenic) variants of theSKIgene which is important in cell growth and development. Most patients are the first to have theSKIgene variant (de novo) in their family, and SGS has rarely been found to be inherited. As of 2024, there are fewer than 50 patients described in the medical literature.
Introduction
SGS is often misdiagnosed as Marfan syndrome or Loeys-Dietz syndrome due to the similar facial, skeletal and cardiovascular features. However, intellectual disability is uniquely and strongly associated with SGS, and heart defects tend to be less common and less severe than seen in patients with Marfan syndrome or Loeys-Dietz syndrome.

symptoms:
Most newborns with SGS are born full term and have normal weight, height and head circumference. Symptoms begin to appear in the newborn period. Both males and females are affected equally. Craniosynostosis is a common characteristic of SGS. This early fusion of skull bones prevents the skull from growing normally. Individuals with SGS tend to have mild to moderate intellectual and cognitive disabilities even if they do not have craniosynostosis.
SGS patients have distinctive facial features, including a long, narrow head (dolichocephaly); widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism); protruding eyes (exophthalmos); temporal downslanting of the eyes (downslanting palpebral fissures); a high, narrow palate; a small lower jaw (micrognathia); and low-set ears that are rotated backward. While a highly arched palate can be seen in Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome, patients with SGS often show enlargement of the palatal shelves or enlarged tissues in the throat, leading to a characteristic “Byzantine arch” appearance.
The physical characteristics of someone with SGS are often said to mimic the “marfanoid habitus” (Marfan features) because their bodies resemble those of individuals with Marfan syndrome. Individuals with SGS have unusually long, slender fingers (arachnodactyly) and limbs, sunken chest (pectus excavatum) or protruding chest (pectus carinatum), flat feet (pes planus), malformation of the first two spine vertebrae C1 and C2 (cervical) and an abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis). Other skeletal abnormalities include one or more fingers that are permanently bent (camptodactyly) and an unusually large range of joint movement (hypermobility).
SGS patients may also have heart anomalies such as valve regurgitation or prolapse and aortic root dilation and aneurysm. Some individuals with SGS have hernias that can be recurrent. Many SGS patients have abnormally low muscle tone generalized throughout the body (hypotonia). In addition, SGS may contribute to gastrointestinal problems such as constipation and delayed gastric emptying (gastroparesis).
Summary ofSymptoms
Facial Features
A long, narrow head (dolichocephaly)High foreheadProtruding forehead (frontal bossing)Widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism)Protruding or bulging eyes (exophthalmos, ocular proptosis)Drooping upper eyelid (ptosis)Wandering eye (strabismus)Outside corners of the eyes point downward (down-slanting palpebral fissures)Increased angle of the eyelids (telecanthus)Upturned nostrils (anteverted nares)A high, narrow palate (roof of the mouth)Under-developed jaw bones (maxillary hypoplasia)Small lower jaw (micrognathia)Recessed jaw and overbite (retrognathia)Low-set ears that are rotated backward
Bone/Skeletal Abnormalities
Premature fusion of one or more sutures of the skull (craniosynostosis)Abnormally small skull (microcephaly)Flattening of the back of the head (brachycephaly)Abnormalities of the cervical spine (C1-C2)Curvature of the spine (scoliosis)Slippage of the vertebrae (spondylolisthesis)Limbs are unusually long (dolichostenomelia)Elbow dislocationsFingers and toes are unusually long and narrow (arachnodactyly)Abnormal bending of joint of fingers (camptodactyly)Flat feet (pes planus)Inward-facing knees (genu valgum)Thin ribs13 pairs of ribsMissing ribsChest wall is “sunken in” or “sticking out” due to abnormal development of breast bone and ribs (pectus excavatum or carinatum)Hypermobility of jointsJoint contractureMalposition of foot (clubfoot)Bone loss (osteopenia)Bowing of long bones
Heart/Blood Vessel Issues
Mitral valve prolapseHole between middle atrial walls (secundum atrial septal defect)Mitral and aortic valve regurgitationAortic root enlargementAortic regurgitationAneurysms in arteries besides the aorta (rare)
Possible Brain Abnormalities
Brain anomalies including water on the brain (hydrocephalus)Enlargement (dilatation) of the lateral ventricles (ventriculomegaly)Brain tissue protrudes into the spinal canal (Chiari 1 malformation)Widening of the Dural sac surrounding the spinal cord (dural ectasia)
Other Characteristics
Neurologic
Delayed motor and cognitive milestonesMild-to-moderate intellectual disability
Gastrointestinal
ConstipationDelayed gastric emptying (gastroparesis)Gastroesophageal reflux (heartburn)
Other
Umbilical and abdominal herniasNearsighted vision (myopia)Loss of subcutaneous fatUnderdeveloped muscles of abdominal wall (aplasia/hypoplasia)Sleep apneaHearing loss (conduction deafness) (rare)Absence of testis (cryptorchidism)Skin hyperelasticity

