Shwachman Diamond Syndrome

synonyms:
lipomatosis of pancreas, congenitalpancreatic insufficiency and bone marrow dysfunctionShwachman-Bodian syndromeShwachman-Diamond-Oski syndromeShwachman syndrome

overview:
Shwachman syndrome is a rare genetic disorder with multiple and varied manifestations. The disorder is typically characterized by signs of insufficient absorption (malabsorption) of fats and other nutrients due to abnormal development of the pancreas (pancreatic insufficiency) and improper functioning of the bone marrow (bone marrow dysfunction), resulting in low levels of circulating blood cells (hematologic abnormalities). Additional characteristic findings may include short stature; abnormal bone development affecting the rib cage and/or bones in the arms and/or legs (metaphyseal dysostosis); and/or liver abnormalities.
Due to abnormal skeletal changes, individuals with Shwachman syndrome may have abnormal thickening of the ribs and their supporting connective tissue (costochondral thickening), resulting in unusually short, flared ribs. In addition, improper bone development (abnormal ossification) within the arms and/or legs (limbs) may cause growth delay in particular bones. Many children with Shwachman syndrome may also be smaller than expected for their ages, with below average height (short stature) and weight. Although malabsorption due to pancreatic insufficiency may itself cause problems with growth and nutrition, short stature appears to be one of the many primary manifestations of Shwachman syndrome.
In addition, as a result of bone marrow dysfunction, individuals with Shwachman syndrome may have a decrease in any or all types of blood cells. Therefore, they may have low levels of certain white blood cells (neutropenia), platelets (thrombocytopenia), red blood cells (anemia), and/or all types of blood cells (pancytopenia). Neutropenia is the most common blood abnormality associated with Shwachman syndrome. Because neutrophils, a type of white blood cell, play an essential role in fighting bacterial infections, many affected individuals are prone to repeated bacterial infections (e.g., recurrent respiratory infections [pneumonia] and infections of the middle ear [otitis media]); in some cases, infections may be severe.
Some affected individuals may also have abnormal enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly), increased levels of certain liver enzymes in the blood, and/or other findings in association with the disorder. Shwachman syndrome is believed to be inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.

symptoms:
Shwachman syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by insufficient absorption (malabsorption) of necessary nutrients due to abnormal development of the pancreas (pancreatic insufficiency); impaired functioning of the bone marrow, resulting in a reduced number of certain blood cells; abnormal bone changes that may affect the rib cage and/or bones in the arms and/or legs (metaphyseal dysostosis); short stature; and/or other physical and/or developmental abnormalities. The range and severity of symptoms may vary greatly from case to case.
One of the primary functions of the pancreas is to produce digestive enzymes. Pancreatic cells called “acinar cells” produce such digestive enzymes. In Shwachman syndrome, however, affected individuals lack a sufficient number of properly functioning acinar cells, and pancreatic tissue may be replaced by abnormal accumulations of fat (pancreatic lipomatosis). As a result, there is a deficiency in the amount of digestive enzymes required to break down food (pancreatic insufficiency), which, in turn, prevents fats and other essential nutrients from being absorbed properly (malabsorption).
In individuals with Shwachman syndrome, intestinal malabsorption results in large, loose, foul smelling stools that contain an excessive amount of fat (steatorrhea) and other nutrients. Affected infants may fail to gain the expected amount of weight or may lose weight (failure to thrive). In addition, pancreatic insufficiency may result in deficiencies of certain vitamins (e.g., vitamins A, D, K and/or E) and/or additional nutritional deficiencies. Children with Shwachman syndrome may have larger or smaller appetites than normal and be smaller than expected for their ages, which may be due, in part, to malabsorption of certain necessary nutrients. As children with Shwachman syndrome grow older, the ability of the pancreas to produce digestive enzymes may improve slightly, potentially leading to an improvement in the absorption of certain nutrients and relief of symptoms associated with malabsorption. For example, in almost 50 percent of cases, older children may begin to have normal stool patterns. However, even with improved absorption of nutrients and acceptable weight gain, most affected children will be smaller than average for their ages.
Shwachman syndrome is also characterized by abnormalities of the soft tissue within bone, called bone marrow. Red bone marrow, which is found within the cavities of all bones at birth, contains immature cells known as stem cells that develop into the three cellular components of the blood. These include red blood cells, which carry oxygen to the cells of the body; white blood cells, which are involved in fighting off infections; and platelets, which help the blood to clot properly. In Shwachman syndrome, bone marrow dysfunction results in impaired production of blood cells.
Almost all individuals with Shwachman syndrome have an abnormally decreased number of certain white blood cells (neutrophils). Called “neutropenia,” this condition may be persistent (chronic) or occur occasionally (paroxysmal). In extremely rare cases, neutropenia may occur in regular, predictable cycles (cyclic neutropenia).
Neutrophils play an essential role in fighting bacterial infections by detecting, engulfing, and digesting invading bacteria (phagocytosis). In neutropenia associated with Shwachman syndrome, not only may there be an abnormally low number of neutrophils, but those that are present may have an impaired ability to detect and appropriately respond to invading bacteria (impaired chemotaxis). As a result, affected individuals with neutropenia may be prone to repeated bacterial infections including respiratory infections (e.g., pneumonia); infections of the middle ear (otitis media); and repeated bacterial infections of other areas of the body. Although most young children with Shwachman syndrome are prone to such repeated bacterial infections, such susceptibility may vary from case to case, depending upon the degree of neutropenia and other immune factors that help the body to fight off infections.
Affected individuals with neutropenia may also have additional abnormalities believed to result from an increased susceptibility to infections. These may include increased tooth decay (dental caries), mouth ulcers, and/or disease of the tissues that surround and support the teeth (periodontal disease).
The bone marrow dysfunction associated with Shwachman syndrome may result in abnormalities in the production of other types of blood cells. In some cases, affected individuals have a reduced number of circulating blood platelets (thrombocytopenia), which play an important role in clotting the blood. Individuals with thrombocytopenia may bruise easily and, without appropriate precautions, be prone to abnormal bleeding; however, episodes of severe bleeding are rare.
In approximately half of individuals with Shwachman syndrome, there may be abnormally low levels of red blood cells (anemia). Because red blood cells contain hemoglobin, which functions to carry oxygen, low levels of red blood cells may result in an impaired ability to transport oxygen from the lungs to tissues throughout the body. Associated symptoms may include fatigue, abnormal paleness of the skin (pallor), and/or other findings.
In addition, in some cases, failure of the bone marrow’s cell-generating capacity leads to pancytopenia or decreased levels of all cellular components of the blood, potentially in association with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). MDS refers to bone marrow disorders characterized by abnormal stem cells and low levels of red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. MDS may precede the development of acute myeloid leukemia, a cancer in which cells that normally develop into certain white blood cells (granulocytes) become malignant and abnormally proliferate. Only approximately one-third of children with Shwachman syndrome eventually develop one of these conditions.
Approximately half of individuals with Shwachman syndrome also have abnormal bone changes that may affect the rib cage and/or bones in the arms and/or legs (limbs). For example, some affected individuals may have abnormal thickening of the ribs and their supporting connective tissue (costochondral thickening), resulting in abnormally short, flared ribs. In addition, in rare cases, abnormal narrowness of the rib cage may cause difficulties with breathing during infancy; however, such symptoms may improve later in childhood.
In cases where limb bone changes occur, the region where the long shaft of the bone (diaphysis) meets its growing end (epiphysis) may develop improperly (metaphyseal dysostosis). In most cases, metaphyseal dysostosis has no harmful effects. However, abnormal bone development (improper ossification) may cause growth delay in a particular bone. Such abnormalities may affect particular areas such as the thigh bone (femur) or the shin bone (tibia). For example, such changes may cause an abnormal reduction in the angle of the thigh bone or the knee, potentially resulting in shortening of the leg, stiffness, and/or limping.
In rare cases, individuals with Shwachman syndrome may have additional skeletal malformations such as fingers that are abnormally bent (clinodactyly). Some affected infants may also have delays in tooth eruption, and their teeth may develop improperly (dental dysplasia).
Another primary characteristic often associated with Shwachman syndrome is short stature. At birth, affected infants are usually of normal height and weight. However, shortly after birth, growth slows and, by the first year of life, most children are below average for height and weight. Most children continue to grow and gain weight at a normal rate but remain smaller than average. The severity of the abnormality varies greatly from case to case. Although malabsorption due to pancreatic insufficiency may cause secondary problems with growth and nutrition, short stature appears to be one of the many primary manifestations of Shwachman syndrome.
Some affected children may also have an abnormally large liver (hepatomegaly) and/or increased levels of certain liver enzymes in the blood (serum liver enzymes). In addition, in some rare cases, those with the disorder may be affected by renal tubular acidosis, a condition in which there is insufficient removal of acid from the blood by the kidney (renal) tubules for excretion in the urine. The renal tubules are part of the filtering units of the kidneys (nephrons). Renal tubular acidosis may lead to increased acid levels in the blood, low blood potassium levels, abnormal calcium deposits within functional tissue (parenchyma) of the kidneys (nephrocalcinosis), softening of bones (osteomalacia), and/or other findings.
Some individuals with Shwachman syndrome may also have additional physical abnormalities. For example, many may exhibit abnormally decreased saliva production, though such symptoms do not appear to contribute to digestive abnormalities. In addition, in early childhood, some with the disorder may have various skin abnormalities including rashes and/or skin that is scaly, dry, and/or rough (ichthyosiform lesions). In many cases, the skin abnormalities may decrease or cease during later childhood.
In rare cases, individuals with Shwachman syndrome may have heart (cardiac) abnormalities. For example, some affected individuals may have abnormal enlargement of the right side of the heart (right-sided hypertrophy). In addition, per reports in the medical literature, children with Shwachman syndrome in a small population in Finland have had an abnormally increased incidence of heart muscle (myocardial) abnormalities as a secondary characteristic in association with the disorder. In such cases, the abnormal formation of scar tissue within heart muscle (myocardial fibrosis) may result in tissue damage and loss (necrosis) in certain areas of the heart (e.g., left ventricle), potentially resulting in life-threatening complications (e.g., heart failure). However, researchers have not observed such patterns of myocardial fibrosis in children with Shwachman syndrome in other geographic locations.
In extremely rare cases, individuals with Shwachman syndrome may also have nervous system abnormalities. These may include an impaired ability to perform certain voluntary movements (apraxia), low muscle tone (hypotonia), and/or general weakness.
In addition, in some cases, children with Shwachman syndrome may experience a delay in reaching developmental milestones (such as crawling, sitting, walking, learning to speak, etc. [delayed motor and speech development]); however, by school age, affected children usually reach their expected milestones. Most children with Shwachman syndrome have normal intelligence; however, in some cases, affected children may have a below-normal I.Q.

