Sickle Cell Disease

synonyms:
SCD

overview:
Summary
Sickle cell disease (SCD) is a rare blood disorder that is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. It is characterized by the presence of sickle, or crescent-shaped, red blood cells (erythrocytes) in the bloodstream. These crescent-shaped cells are stiff and sticky and interact with other cells and the blood clotting system to block blood flow in the very tiny blood vessels (capillaries) of the peripheral blood system (blood vessels outside of the heart). This prevents the normal flow of nutrition and oxygen (as red blood cells are responsible for carrying oxygen throughout the body).
Common symptoms associated with SCD include excruciating bone pain, chest pain, severe infections (primarily in children), low levels of circulating red blood cells (anemia) and yellowing of the skin (jaundice). The blocked blood flow can also cause severe organ damage including stroke. SCD has several recognized forms including sickle cell anemia, sickle cell hemoglobin C disease, and sickle cell / beta-thalassemia disease.

symptoms:
Hemoglobin is an iron-rich protein contained in red blood cells and is responsible for carrying oxygen from the lungs to the rest of the body. In SCD, the symptoms stem from the abnormal hemoglobin in the red blood cells. The abnormal hemoglobin causes the red blood cells to be sickle-shaped which triggers a series of events leading to fragile red blood cells and blocking blood flow.
The most common signs and symptoms of SCD are associated with low red blood cells (anemia) and pain. The most common symptom of anemia is feeling tired and weak (fatigue). Sickle cell pain episodes can occur suddenly and is typically in bones and the abdomen, but can occur almost anywhere. The pain can last for days to over a week (acute) or continue long-term (chronic). Damage can occur to most parts of the body including the brain, lung, kidneys, and joints. SCD can cause yellow eyes (jaundice) from the breakdown of blood. Signs in infants can include swollen and painful hands and/or feet (dactylitis), irritability, crying, and severe infections.
In patients with SCD, the spleen can become enlarged (splenomegaly) as it traps red blood cells that should be in the bloodstream. The spleen functions to filter out abnormal red blood cells and fights some infections such as the bacteria that cause strep throat. Damage to the spleen leads to decreased ability to fight some typically mild infections that can become life-threatening in SCD.
Acute chest syndrome can occur if an infection or sickled cells damages the lungs. This is a life-threatening complication of SCD. Sometimes people can’t tell they have it but other times people can have chest pain, difficulty breathing or fever. Additional complications of SCD include stroke, which can occur in children as young as 2 years. Boys and men with sickle cell disease may experience painful, prolonged erections (priapism) at any age.
The signs and symptoms of SCD vary from patient to patient, and some patients have more mild symptoms while others may have more severe symptoms requiring hospitalization. SCD is present at birth; however, most infants do not show any signs until four months of age and many do not show signs until several years of age. The symptoms typically begin in the first three years of life. Sometimes the first suggestion of SCD is a painful swelling of an infant’s hands or feet (dactylitis). The extreme pain episodes are often triggered by something such as getting cold, becoming dehydrated, infection, over doing it, or trauma. Children with SCD may grow slowly and reach puberty later.
As people with SCD age, other additional complications become more common. Pulmonary hypertension can develop due to damage to the small blood vessels and air sacs in the lungs. This can cause decreased ability to exercise, shortness of breath and tiredness. Leg sores that are often hard to heal can occur; damage to the retina can occur causing eye problems. Damage to the joints (avascular necrosis) and the loss of bone may cause pain in the joints when walking, standing and/or lifting. Kidney damage can occur and gallstones are often present.
There are many forms of SCD. The most common severe form is S/S which some call sickle cell anemia. Some forms, like sickle beta-zero thalassemia are just as severe as the S/S form. Sickle beta-plus thalassemia and sickle cell hemoglobin C disease are usually less severe. Diagnosing exactly what form of SCD someone has is important and there is a lot of confusion about the different forms.

