Simple Pulmonary Eosinophilia

synonyms:
Loeffler syndromeLöffler syndrome

overview:
Summary
Simple pulmonary eosinophilia (SPE), also known as Loeffler syndrome, is a rare, temporary (transient) respiratory disorder characterized by the accumulation of eosinophils in the lungs (pulmonary eosinophilia). Eosinophils are a type of white blood cell and are part of the immune system. They are usually produced in response to allergens, inflammation or infection and are particularly active in the respiratory tract. Most cases of SPE are thought to be due to an allergic reaction to drugs or infection (mainly parasites). SPE usually ranges in severity from no symptoms to development of mild respiratory symptoms. In rare cases, more significant complications can occur. Generally, no specific therapy is required as symptoms usually go away spontaneously without treatment.
Introduction
Simple pulmonary eosinophilia was first described in the medical literature in 1932. It is classified as a form of eosinophilic lung disease. SPE is considered a benign, self-limiting disorder.

symptoms:
SPE usually presents as a mild lung disorder characterized by a dry, unproductive cough, wheezing and a slight fever. Some affected individuals may cough up a mixture of saliva and mucus (sputum). Symptoms usually resolve on their own without treatment (spontaneous resolution) within two weeks to a month. In some people, symptoms can persist for months, especially if the person is exposed to the allergen again.
Additional symptoms can occur including chest pain, wheezing, shortness of breath (dyspnea) and a rapid breathing rate. Some individuals may complain of a general feeling of poor health (malaise). Inflammation of the mucous membranes of the nose (rhinitis), unintended weight loss and night sweats have also been reported.
Some individuals with SPE develop acute eosinophilic pneumonia (AEP). AEP is a rare, serious lung disorder that can quickly progress to cause acute respiratory failure. (For more information on AEP, see the related disorders section below).

