Singleton Merten syndrome

synonyms:
Merten-Singleton syndrome

overview:
Singleton-Merten syndrome is an extremely rare, multisystem disorder the major characteristics of which are tooth abnormalities (dental dysplasia), calcifications in the aorta, the major artery of the body, and certain valves of the heart (i.e., aortic and mitral valves), as well as progressive thinning and loss of protein of the bones (osteoporosis), especially in the hands and feet. Other physical findings usually associated with Singleton-Merten syndrome may include generalized muscle weakness; progressive loss or wasting away of muscle tissue (atrophy); delayed growth, possibly resulting in short stature; delays in motor development; a skin condition characterized by thickened patches of red, scaly skin, particularly on the fingers; vision problems (glaucoma); abnormal ligaments of the joints and muscle; and/or malformation of the hips and/or feet. It appears that, in some cases, Singleton-Merten syndrome is present as a result of a random (sporadic) mutation that occurs for no apparent reason. In other cases, an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance has been suggested.

symptoms:
Singleton-Merten syndrome, an extremely rare disorder, is characterized by abnormalities of the teeth (dental dysplasia), abnormal accumulation of calcium deposits (calcifications) in the major artery of the body (aorta) and certain valves of the heart (i.e., aortic and mitral valves), and/or progressive thinning and loss of protein of the bones (osteoporosis). Between the ages of four to 24 months, most affected infants experience generalized muscle weakness and loss or wasting away (atrophy) of muscle tissue. Affected infants may also exhibit delays in general physical (somatic) development, possibly resulting in short stature, and/or delays in the ability to coordinate muscles and perform certain tasks (motor development).
Abnormalities affecting the teeth also occur at an early age in individuals with Singleton-Merten syndrome. Affected infants may develop cavities (caries) and lose their primary (deciduous) teeth prematurely. Certain secondary (permanent) teeth may not develop (erupt) or may erupt late; those permanent teeth that do develop are usually malformed (dysplastic). In some patients, permanent teeth may also be lost prematurely.
By late infancy or early childhood, affected individuals may experience symptoms associated with the progressive accumulation of calcium deposits (calcifications) in the major artery of the body (aorta) and on certain valves of the heart (i.e., aortic and mitral). The aorta arises from the lower pumping chamber of the heart (left ventricle) and supplies oxygen-rich (oxygenated) blood to all the arteries of the body (excluding the pulmonary artery). In individuals with Singleton-Merten syndrome, deposits of calcium (calcifications) form in the portion of the aorta nearest the heart (proximal thoracic aorta). The accumulation of calcium deposits is progressive and typically causes blockage and narrowing of the aorta (calcific aortic stenosis), obstructing the flow of oxygenated blood. In some cases, abnormal calcium deposits may also develop around the valve on the left side of the heart (mitral valve calcification). As a result of calcification of these various structures, affected individuals may experience high blood pressure (hypertension), abnormal transmission of electrical impulses (conduction) that coordinate the activity of the heart muscle (heart block), abnormal contractions of the heart (systolic murmurs), and/or abnormal enlargement of the heart (cardiomegaly). By late adolescence, the heart may be unable to pump blood effectively (heart failure), leading to life-threatening complications.
Infants with Singleton-Merten syndrome may also experience abnormal thinning and weakness of the bones (osteoporosis). As a result, bones are frequently brittle and may fracture easily. Osteoporosis may occur in the skull and the long bones of the arms and legs, but is most prominent in the bones of the hands and fingers.
Other findings associated with Singleton-Merten syndrome may include malformations of the hips and feet that may occur due to muscle weakness; wearing away (erosion) of the bones in the tips of the fingers (terminal phalanges); and/or a chronic skin condition characterized by red, thick, scaly patches of skin (psoriasiform skin eruption). Some affected individuals may have abnormal accumulation of pressure of the fluid of the eye (glaucoma) and/or abnormal sensitivity to light (photosensitivity). Typical facial features have also been described in individuals with Singleton-Merten syndrome including a high anterior hairline, broad forehead, drooping of the upper eyelids (ptosis), a loss of the vertical groove between the base of the nose and upper lip (philtrum), and a thin upper lip border (vermillion).

