Sirenomelia

synonyms:
mermaid syndromesirenomelia sequencesirenomelia syndromesirenomelus

overview:
Sirenomelia, which is also known as mermaid syndrome, is an extremely rare congenital developmental disorder characterized by anomalies of the lower spine and the lower limbs. Affected infants are born with partial or complete fusion of the legs. Additional malformations may also occur including genitourinary abnormalities, gastrointestinal abnormalities, anomalies of the lumbarsacral spine and pelvis and absence or underdevelopment (agenesis) of one or both kidneys. Affected infants may have one foot, no feet or both feet, which may be rotated externally. The tailbone is usually absent and the sacrum is partially or completely absent as well. Additional conditions may occur with sirenomelia including imperforate anus, spina bifida, and heart (cardiac) malformations. Sirenomelia is often fatal during the newborn period. The exact cause of sirenomelia is unknown, most cases occur randomly for no apparent reason (sporadically).
Some sources in the medical literature classify sirenomelia as the most severe form of caudal regression syndrome, a complex developmental disorder. However, recently many researchers have indicated that sirenomelia is a similar, but distinct, disorder. NORD has a separate report on caudal regression syndrome.

symptoms:
There are a wide range of physical malformations that can potentially occur with sirenomelia and the specific findings can vary greatly from one individual to another. Sirenomelia is associated with severe life-threatening complications and is often fatal in the first years of life. However, survival beyond infancy into later childhood or young adulthood has been reported in a handful of cases.
The characteristic finding of sirenomelia is partial or complete fusion of the lower legs. The degree of severity is highly variable. Affected infants may have only one femur (the long bone of the thigh) or may have two femurs within one shaft of the skin. Affected infants may have one foot, no feet or both feet, which may be rotated so that the back of the foot is facing forward.
Affected infants may also have a variety of urogenital abnormalities including absence of one or both kidneys (renal agenesis), cystic malformation of the kidneys, an absent bladder, narrowing of the urethra (urethral atresia). In addition, they may have an imperforate anus, a condition in which a thin covering blocking the anal opening or the passage that normally connects the anus and lowest part of the large intestine (rectum) fails to develop.
Infants with sirenomelia may also have abnormalities affecting the sacral and lumbar spine. In some patients, abnormal front-to-back curvature of the spine (lordosis) may occur. Affected individuals may also lack external genitalia. Absence of the spleen and/or the gallbladder has also been reported.
Defects affecting the abdominal wall may also occur such as protrusion of a portion of the intestines through a hole near the bellybutton (omphalocele). Some individuals with sirenomelia may have a meningomyelocele, a condition in which the membranes that cover the spine and, in some cases, the spinal cord itself protrude through a defect in the spinal column. Congenital heart defects and respiratory complications such as severe underdevelopment of the lungs (pulmonary hypoplasia) can also be associated with sirenomelia.

