Sitosterolemia

synonyms:
phytosterolemiabeta-sitosterolemiaplant sterol storage disease

overview:
Summary
Sitosterolemia is a rare genetic condition that causes the body to store plant sterols. There are at least two types of sterols: sterols from animals (example, cholesterol) and sterols from plants –also called phytosterols (example, sitosterol). Most people normally absorb plant sterols from the food they eat and excrete them in the gut. People with sitosterolemia absorb plant sterols but cannot excrete them, resulting in the accumulation of plant sterols in the body, especially in the blood and the arteries. Sitosterolemia is an autosomal recessive genetic condition caused by changes (mutations) in theABCG5orABCG8gene.
Introduction
Standard lipid profiles do not check for plant sterol in the blood, so sitosterolemia is frequently missed unless a special blood test is ordered. Variability in presenting signs and symptoms and low awareness of this condition contribute to missed or delayed diagnosis. If left untreated, sitosterolemia can lead to premature hardening of the arteries (atherosclerosis) and premature death. However, sitosterolemia is manageable with medications that limit plant sterol absorption in the gut and with special diets that contain very little plant sterols.

symptoms:
Signs and symptoms of sitosterolemia vary from person to person, but any one of these symptoms alone is reason enough to be tested for it. Some patients (especially children) present with high cholesterol. While most cases of high cholesterol are not caused by sitosterolemia, if a patient’s cholesterol varies greatly with diet, but does not respond well to statins, then it could be a sign of sitosterolemia.
Patients with sitosterolemia may present with xanthomas, which are visible fatty deposits under the skin. They can be located anywhere, but frequently occur around the knees, heels, elbows, buttocks, or around the eyes. However, the absence of xanthomas should never be used to rule out sitosterolemia.
Deposits of plant sterols sometimes cause joint stiffness and pain. Some sitosterolemia patients only present with blood abnormalities such as low platelet count (thrombocytopenia), abnormally large platelets (macrothrombocytopenia) or abnormally shaped red blood cells (stomatocytes).
All sitosterolemia patients will have elevated levels of plant sterols in their blood (see Diagnosis section).

