Small Cell Lung Cancer

synonyms:
oat cell cancerSCLC

overview:
Summary
Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an aggressive form of lung cancer. It is characterized by rapid, uncontrolled growth of certain cells in the lungs. Eventually, a tumor forms and the cancer can spread (metastasize) to other areas of the body. The primary risk factor is tobacco use; almost all affected individuals smoke or have a history of smoking. Symptoms can vary from one person to another, and there are rarely any symptoms early in the course of the disease. Generally, SCLC is broken down into two main stages: limited stage disease, which is potentially curable in about 20%-25% of people, and extensive stage disease, which is more difficult to treat. Affected individuals are treated with chemotherapy and often radiation therapy. In a small group of people with very early-stage cancer, surgery may be recommended. Although there has been only slight progress in treatment over the last couple of decades, there has been a renewed interest in SCLC over the past several years and multiple clinical trials are underway for newer, targeted therapies to treat the disorder.

Introduction
Small cell lung cancer is characterized as a neuroendocrine carcinoma because the cancer cells have features of nerve cells and endocrine (hormone-secreting) cells. Endocrine tissue is specialized tissue that contains hormone-secreting cells. These hormones have a variety of functions within the body.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of small cell lung cancer can vary from one person to another. Specific findings depend on numerous factors including the exact location and size of the tumor, the extent of invasion of the tumor into nearby tissue or organs and whether the disease has remained localized or spread to other areas of the body (metastasized). Early in the course of the disease, there may be no symptoms (asymptomatic) or only a few, mild symptoms. As the tumor grows, more signs and symptoms develop.
Common symptoms include a cough that doesn’t get better, chest pain that is worse when coughing, laughing or taking a deep breath, shortness of breath, coughing up of blood (hemoptysis) and hoarseness or wheezing. Some affected individuals can develop loss of appetite, unintended weight loss, fatigue and recurrent episodes of lung infections such as pneumonia or bronchitis.
When SCLC spreads (metastasizes) the most commonly affected areas are the lymph nodes, brain, liver, adrenal glands, bone and bone marrow. The symptoms that develop will vary depending upon the specific area(s) affected and the extent of the disease. Symptoms can include bone pain from spread to bones; yellowing of the eyes, skin and mucous membranes (jaundice) from cancer spreading to the liver; headaches, dizziness, double vision, seizures or a sensation of numbness or tingling in the hands and arms and feet and legs when cancer spreads to the brain; or small lumps or growths on the skin when cancer has spread to the skin or lymph nodes.
Individuals with SCLC can also develop paraneoplastic syndromes. These syndromes are rare disorders that are caused by either abnormal production of hormones or an abnormal response of the immune system to the cancer. It is believed that white blood cells, which normally help to protect the body from bacteria, viruses and other foreign invaders, can mistakenly attack healthy tissue causing a variety of neurologic problems, such as weakness, loss of sensation, imbalance or confusion. A common paraneoplastic syndrome in SCLC is called the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH). This syndrome is characterized by excessive production of antidiuretic hormone, which causes people to retain water and lowers salt (sodium) levels in the body which can cause fatigue, lethargy and confusion.

