Smith Magenis Syndrome

synonyms:
chromosome 17, interstitial deletion 17pChromosome 17p11.2 deletion syndromeSMCRSmith-Magenis chromosome regionretinoic acid induced 1 gene (RAI1)SMS

overview:
Summary
Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS) is a complex developmental disorder that affects multiple organ systems of the body. The disorder is characterized by a pattern of abnormalities that are present at birth (congenital) as well as behavioral and cognitive problems. Common symptoms include distinctive facial features, skeletal malformations, varying degrees of intellectual disability, speech and motor delays, sleep disturbances, and self-injurious or attention-seeking behaviors. The specific symptoms present in each patients can vary dramatically from one individual to another. Approximately 90% of cases are caused when a portion of chromosome is missing or deleted (monosomic). This deleted portion within chromosome 17p11.2 includes theRAI1gene, which is believed to play a major role in the development of the disorder. In the remaining cases, there is no deleted material on chromosome 17; these cases are caused by mutations in theRAI1gene.  Other genes within the deleted segment may also play a role in variable features in the syndrome, but it is not fully understood how significant a role they play in the development of SMS. In the remaining cases, there is no deleted material on chromosome 17; these cases are caused by mutations in theRAI1gene.
Introduction
Smith-Magenis syndrome was first reported in the medical literature in 1982 by Ann Smith, a genetic counselor, and colleagues. In 1986, Smith and Dr. R. Ellen Magenis identified nine patients with the disorder further delineating the syndrome. Since that time numerous additional cases have been identified allowing physicians/clinicians to develop a better understanding about this complex neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD).

symptoms:
Smith-Magenis syndrome is a highly variable disorder. The specific symptoms present and the overall severity of the disorder can vary from one person to another. It is important to understand that affected individuals will not have all of the symptoms discussed below and that every individual case is unique. Parents should talk to the physician and medical team about their child’s specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
Many individuals with SMS have distinctive facial features including a broad, square-shaped facial appearance, a prominent forehead, deep-set eyes that are farther apart than usual (hypertelorism), an upslanting palpebral (eye) fissures, a broad bridge of the nose, hair growth between the eyebrows so it appears as one long eyebrow (synophrys), a down-turned (everted; cupid bow) upper lip, a short, full-tipped nose, and underdevelopment of the middle portion of the face (midface retrusion). The head may appear disproportionately short (brachycephaly). Some affected infants may have an abnormally small jaw (micrognathia) and the facial appearance is more “cherubic” with rosy cheeks. As affected individuals age, micrognathia may change so that the lower jaw abnormally protrudes outward (relative prognathia). In general, the distinctive facial features associated with SMS progress with age. Affected individuals may also exhibit absence (agenesis) of secondary (permanent) teeth, particularly premolars, and taurodauntism, a condition characterized by enlargement of the pulp chambers and reduction of the roots of teeth; open bite posture with large tongue (macroglossia) and history of bruxism (teeth grinding) are also common.
Infants usually have diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), poor reflexes (hyporeflexia), and feeding difficulties such as poor sucking ability, which can contribute to failure to thrive. Failure to thrive is defined as the failure to grow and gain weight at a rate that would be expected based upon age and gender. Infants are generally quiet and complacent with infrequent crying and diminished vocalizations reflecting the marked early expressive speech delay. In addition, affected infants may nap for prolonged periods of time and exhibit generalized daytime lethargy. Gastroesophageal reflux is also common during infancy.
Individuals with SMS have varying degrees of cognitive ability. Many individuals exhibit mild to moderate intellectual disability. Affected individuals often exhibit delays in attaining speech and motor skills and in reaching developmental milestones (developmental delays). Expressive language is often more delayed than receptive language skills.
Specific behavioral problems (maladaptive behaviors) occur in children with SMS. A common initial sign is head banging during early childhood. Frequent upper body squeezes often described as “self-hugging” is also common. Affected children may also display impulsivity, hyperactivity and attention deficient disorder, frequent and prolonged tantrums, sudden mood changes, toilet training difficulties, disobedience, and aggressive or attention-seeking behaviors. In addition to head banging, affected children may develop other self-injurious behavior such as hand biting, face slapping, skin picking, and wrist biting. Repeated head banging can potentially cause detachment of the retina, which although a concern, is not a high risk. Older children may yank at fingernails and toenails (onychotillomania) or insert objects into body orifices (polyembolokoilamania). Affected children tend to be excitable and easily distracted. Although behavioral issues are common, many individuals tend to have endearing and engaging personalities, with great senses of humor, and facile long-term memory for faces, places and things.
Affected children may experience chronic ear infections, including repeated middle ear infections (otitis media). Hearing loss is very common, typically ranging from slight to mild in degree and showing a pattern of fluctuating and progressive hearing decline with age. Both conductive and/or sensorineural hearing loss may develop.  Conductive hearing loss is most common in early childhood (under 10 years), while sensorineural hearing loss occurs more frequently at older ages (11years – adulthood). Conductive hearing loss develops when sound waves are inappropriately conducted through the external or middle ear to the inner ear, resulting in decreased sensitivity to sound. Sensorineural hearing loss develops where there is damage to the inner ear (cochlea) or the nerve pathway from inner ear to the brain.  Some affected children may be abnormally sensitive to certain sounds or frequencies (hyperacusis). Frequent sinus infections (sinusitis) are also common. Eye abnormalities such as progressive nearsightedness (myopia), crossed eyes (strabismus), and unusually smallness of the cornea (microcornea) may also occur.
Affected children often have abnormalities affecting the larynx (voice box) or surrounding tissue. Laryngeal abnormalities include the formation of polyps and nodules or swelling due to fluid retention (edema). Paralysis of the vocal cords has also developed. Affected children may experience velopharyngeal insufficiency, in which the soft palate of the mouth does not close properly during speech. Oral sensorimotor dysfunction, in which affected individuals have difficulties controlling the lips, tongue and jaw muscles, may also develop and can cause tongue protrusion and frequent drooling. Due to such abnormalities, children may develop a hoarse, deep voice. These abnormalities also contribute to delays in speech development.
Excessive weight gain and obesity may be seen in adolescence and approximately 90% of children may be overweight or obese by the age of 14. Affected individuals may exhibit short stature during childhood, although height is typically within the normal range as adults. Approximately 50% of children may have unusually high levels of cholesterol in the blood (hypercholesterolemia). Chronic constipation is also a frequent complication.
The sleep disturbance that occurs in affected individuals is a chronic lifelong problem. In addition to sleep issues during infancy (generalized lethargy & “too sleepy”), affected individuals develop significant sleep disturbances from early childhood that continue into adolescence and adulthood. The sleep cycle is characterized by problems that can include difficulty falling asleep, shortened sleep cycles, an inability to enter REM sleep and frequently awaking during the night and early in the morning (5:30-6:30AM). In general, the hours of sleep are less than expected for age. As a consequence of the disrupted nighttime sleep cycle affected individuals may exhibit periods of drowsiness during the day, known as excessive daytime sleepiness or sleep debt, which remains a chronic issue. The sleep abnormalities are associated with an inverted circadian rhythm of melatonin, reported in over 90% of studied cases. A circadian rhythm sleep disorder occurs when a person’s biological clocks fails to synchronize to a normal 24-hour day. Specifically, melatonin, a normal occurring hormone, rises and falls; it rises, peaking at night and causes drowsiness. Melatonin levels lessen in the morning, reaching their lowest levels during the middle of the day. In individuals with an inverted circadian rhythm, the rising and falling of melatonin levels is reversed (daytime highs).
Skeletal malformations are common in individuals with SMS and can include front-to-back curvature of the spine (lordosis), mild-to-moderate sideways curvature of the spine (scoliosis), abnormally small hands and feet, and markedly flat or highly arched feet that can cause an unusually manner of walking (abnormal broad-based gait). In rare cases, affected children have vertebral anomalies and forearm and elbow limitations.
Less often, other symptoms or physical findings have occurred in individuals with SMS including immune system dysfunction, thyroid function abnormalities (hypothyroidism), heart (cardiac) defects, kidney (renal) and/or urinary tract malformations, cleft lip and cleft palate, and seizures. Seizure activity can occur subtly so that seizure goes unnoticed (subclinical seizures). Peripheral neuropathy, which is a general term for any disorder of the peripheral nervous system, may also occur. Peripheral neuropathy encompasses any disorder that primarily affects the nerves outside the central nervous system (i.e. brain and spinal cord). Symptoms may include a decreased sensitivity to pain commonly seen in SMS. Peripheral neuropathy is often associated with the loss of sensation or abnormal sensations such as tingling, burning, or pricking along the affected nerves, but it is unknown whether this occurs in individuals with SMS.

