Smith-Kingsmore Syndrome

synonyms:
SKS

overview:
Summary
Smith-Kingsmore syndrome (SKS) is a rare, neurodevelopmental genetic disorder caused by changes (disease-causing variants) in theMTORgene. SKS impacts the digestive, endocrine, metabolic and nervous systems.
Patients with SKS have a spectrum of medical, intellectual, and behavioral disabilities resulting in different and variable clinical outcomes. The most common findings in people with SKS are intellectual disability, developmental delay, large brain size (megalencephaly) and seizures. The symptoms vary and largely depend on the type ofMTORgene mutation that the patient has and its distribution in the body. Management of patients with SKS includes treatment of medical concerns, such as seizures as well as speech and physical therapy. Treatment is symptom-driven and there is currently no cure.
Introduction
Genetic changes in theMTORgene were first noted as a cause of a neurodevelopmental disorder in 2013. Studies are still needed to continue to define the characteristics associated with specificMTORgene variants. Presently, genetic changes inMTORcan be separated into three clinical types.
The first group includes patients with generalized brain overgrowth (megalencephaly), intellectual disability, autism and hypotonia. These are the patients who have been identified as having SKS.
The second group includes patients with diffuse brain overgrowth, abnormalities of the surface of the brain (polymicrogyria) and skin pigmentation abnormalities.
The third group includes patients with focal changes in the brain (focal cortical dysplasia or hemimegalencephaly) causing early-onset epilepsy.
The distribution and levels ofMTORgenetic changes in these three groups vary. The mutations inMTORin patients with SKS are usually present in all cells of the body. Disease characteristics vary in patients with SKS, even if they have the sameMTORgene mutation. In contrast, genetic changes inMTORin the second and third groups can be more localized or restricted to certain tissues (mosaic). This may cause these mutations to escape detection if a patient has genetic testing on a blood or saliva sample.

symptoms:
Many symptoms and features are thought to be part of SKS. Some of these characteristics occur more frequently than others. Since there is great variability, not every person with SKS will have all these features. As research progresses, the formal description of SKS will likely change.
Individuals with SKS often show symptoms in very early childhood, sometimes at birth or in the first six months of life. These children often have medical challenges and typically have developmental delays. For example, children with SKS may not reach developmental milestones such as rolling over, sitting up, walking, or talking at the expected time.
Common features of SKS vary but may include:
BEHAVIORAL
• Autism / autistic traits / sensory processing disorder• ADHD (attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder)• Non-verbal /speech anomalies, delayed or absent speech, distorted articulation• Self-harming behaviors
NEUROLOGIC
• Global developmental delays/intellectual disability• Macrocephaly / megalencephaly / ventriculomegaly / polymicrogyria / other brain abnormalities on MRI / rapid head growth in the first 6 months• Low muscle tone (hypotonia)• Seizures (including nocturnal focal epilepsy)• Sleep issues (insomnia, waking at night, sleep apnea)• Hearing Impairment• Cortical visual impairment
DIGESTION / GASTROINTESTINAL
• Digestive issues (abdominal pain, constipation)• Hyperphagia (abnormally increased appetite for food)
PHYSICAL
• Curly / wavy hair• Abnormal facial features• Frontal bossing, open mouth appearance, prominent and long philtrum, short nose with a flat nasal bridge, macrostomia, hypertelorism• Macrosomia at birth (large for gestational age)• Skin pigmentation / Blaschko lines / hypomelanosis/hypermelanosis in vito / Cafe au lait spots• Decreased perspiration and heat intolerance• Accelerated growth in first 18 months to 2 years• Delayed bone age (scan at 2 years like a newborn) or slightly advanced bone age• Motor skill deficits

