Snyder-Robinson Syndrome

synonyms:
spermine synthase deficiency syndromeSRS

overview:
Summary

Snyder-Robinson syndrome (SRS) is a rare X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) disorder in which affected males have a slender build with long limbs, angular profile, and prominent muscles or bones (asthenic habitus), low muscle mass, some abnormal facial features (dysmorphism), speech abnormalities, outward curvature and lateral curvature of the spine (kyphoscoliosis) and decreased bone mass leading to fragile bones (osteoporosis). Seizures are also rather common. The syndrome results from an inactivating mutation in the spermine synthase (SMS) gene resulting in an inability to convert spermidine to spermine.

Introduction

Snyder-Robinson syndrome was first described in a single family by Snyder and Robinson in 1969 as a non-syndromic X-linked disorder. Arena et al. (1996) re-examined the family and determined the affected males represented a novel X-linked syndrome. In 2003 Cason and colleagues determined that SRS resulted from a mutation in the SMS gene located at Xp21.3-p22.12. Since then, utilization of biochemical analysis (lack of SMS activity, altered spermidine/spermine ratio) to validate SMS mutations has allowed the identification of an additional 21families (most not published) with SRS.

symptoms:
The symptoms, progression and severity of SRS exhibit some variability across families and individual patients. Affected children have a “gestalt” consisting of facial dysmorphism with a prominent lower lip, an asthenic build, low muscle mass, kyphoscohosis and speech abnormalities. Males with SRS have low muscle tone (hypotonia) at birth. Symptoms appear early, especially the facial features. Developmental milestones are also not met early in life. The developmental delay progresses such that many boys with SRS have some motor disability. Osteoporosis develops which can result in numerous fractures without a causative event. Seizures have been noted in many affected males and severity varies.

