Soft Tissue Sarcoma

synonyms:
STS

overview:
Summary
Sarcomas are malignant (cancerous) tumors that arise from cells that make up the connective tissues, which are the tissues that connect, support and surround structures and organs in the body. They can be broadly broken down into bone, visceral and soft tissue forms. Soft tissues are tissues of the body that have not hardened or calcified like bone has. Soft tissues are found all over the body and include muscles, tendons, ligaments, nerves, fat, blood vessels and lymph vessels. Soft tissue sarcomas can arise from fat, muscle, nerve, tendons and blood and lymph vessel tissue. For some sarcomas the tissue of origin is uncertain such as pleiomorphic undifferentiated sarcoma. Synovial sarcoma is a misnomer as it does not arise from synovial tissue (as was originally thought). Sarcomas can occur almost anywhere in the body, but the most common areas are the arms and legs, the back of the abdomen (retroperitoneum) and head and neck. They can affect adults or children. These tumors are diverse with significantly different signs and symptoms, progression and often different treatment regimens. The exact, underlying cause of these tumors is not fully understood. Most likely, complex genetic and environmental factors play a role in their development. As researchers learn more about the genetic factors associated with these disorders, newer, targeted therapies may become available. Sarcomas are rate tumors that account for approximately 1% of tumors in humans.

Introduction
Soft tissue sarcomas are a form of cancer. Cancer is characterized by abnormal, uncontrolled growth of cells that invades surrounding tissue and can sometimes spread (metastasize) to distant areas of the body via the bloodstream, the lymphatic system or other means. Different forms of cancer, including soft tissue sarcomas, may be classified based upon the cell type involved, the specific nature of the malignancy and the clinical course of the disease. According to the World Health Organization classification, there are more than 100 different histologic subtypes of soft tissue sarcomas.
This report is a general overview of soft tissue sarcomas as a group. NORD has individual reports on several types of soft tissue sarcoma, including alveolar soft part sarcoma; desmoid tumors; extraosseous Ewing sarcoma; gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST); leiomyosarcoma; leiomyosarcoma of the inferior vena cava; liposarcoma; mesenchymal chondrosarcoma; pleuropulmonary blastoma; tenosynovial giant cell tumors and uterine leiomyosarcoma. These forms of soft tissue sarcoma are not discussed in this report. Individual reports go into greater detail concerning the signs and symptoms and treatment options for these rare cancers. (For more information, choose the specific name as the search term for the Rare Disease Database.)

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of soft tissue sarcomas can vary greatly from one person to another. Specific findings depend on numerous factors including the specific subtype, the exact location of the tumor, the extent of the tumor into nearby tissue or organs, the specific organs involved and whether the disease has remained localized or spread to other areas of the body (metastasized).
Often, soft tissue sarcomas will not be associated with any noticeable symptoms early in the course of the disease. At some point, affected individuals may notice a slow-growing, painless mass in the affected area. Tumors can become very large and cause pain or symptoms related to pressing against (compression of) nearby organs, nerves or structures in the body. Large tumors in the arms or legs can lead to a sensation of numbness, burning or tingling in the hands or feet (paresthesia). Tumors in the stomach or abdomen can cause abdominal pain or blood in the stool. Swelling (edema) can occur in areas where tumors push up against lymph vessels. Tumors near the skin can damage the skin, causing open sores (ulceration).
Sometimes, soft tissue sarcomas can cause nonspecific symptoms. These are symptoms that are common to many different disorders and conditions. These symptoms include nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, unintended weight loss, unexplained fatigue and a general feeling of poor health (malaise).
SUBTYPESAccording to the World Health Organization, there are more than 100 histologic subtypes of soft tissue sarcoma. Several of the better-known subtypes are briefly discussed below.
AngiosarcomaThis form of cancer starts in cells that make up the walls of blood vessels. When it affects lymphatic tissue, it is called a lymphangiosarcoma. The lymphatic system is part of the immune system and helps to protect the body against infection and disease. It consists of tubular channels (lymph vessels) that drain a watery fluid known as lymph from different areas of the body into the bloodstream.
Angiosarcoma can occur in almost any area of the body and is often aggressive with spread to other areas. The skin of the head and neck is a commonly affected site. Angiosarcoma of soft tissue can present in the lower extremities, the space behind the abdominal cavity (retroperitoneum) or the soft tissue of the chest (mediastinum). Angiosarcoma of the breast can present as either a mass within the breast or as a cutaneous angiosarcoma seen as a rare late effect of radiation for breast cancer.
In most instances, there are no obvious symptoms early in their development. Angiosarcoma are prone to bleeding (hemorrhaging). When angiosarcoma affects the skin, there may be reddish or purplish discoloration that looks like a bruise. A lesion may form that is prone to bleeding and swelling. When angiosarcoma affects an organ, symptoms depend upon the exact size and location of the tumor. Prior radiation exposure may play a role in the development of secondary angiosarcoma. Recent investigations have demonstrated differing genetic patterns between primary and secondary angiosarcoma.
A rare form of angiosarcoma, called lymphangiosarcoma or Stewart-Treves syndrome, develops in people with long-standing primary or secondary lymphedema.
Angiosarcoma may also present as a primary tumor in bone.
Clear cell sarcomaThis form accounts for less than 1% of all soft tissue sarcomas. These tumors arise in tendons, the tough, flexible tissue that attaches muscle to bone. They usually develop in the arms and legs, specifically the foot and ankle region. They usually develop as a slow-growing lump or mass that may or may not be tender or painful. Eventually, the tumor spreads to nearby tissue. They are most common in young adults. Under a microscope, the cells of these tumors resemble those of a skin cancer called melanoma, and sometimes distinguishing these two cancers can be difficult.
Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberansThis form of soft tissue sarcoma arises in the inner layer of skin called the dermis. They may present as a slow-growing bump (nodule) or as a spot of hardened skin or a deep-seated pimple. They may involve nearby tissue, but usually do not spread to other areas of the body. These tumors may recur after surgery. The risk of distant spread is increased when these tumors undergo fibrosarcomatous transformation.
Desmoplastic small round cell tumorThis is an extremely rare form of soft tissue sarcoma that usually arises in the abdomen or pelvis, although it can develop elsewhere in the body. It is aggressive and often spreads to other areas of the body, particularly the lungs or liver. These tumors can cause pain and a mass can usually be felt in the abdomen. This form most commonly affects Caucasian men between 10 and 30 years of age but can also affect young women and young children. These tumors can recur after treatment.
Epithelioid sarcomaThis form usually develops in the soft tissue just underneath the skin, most often in the fingers, hand, forearms and lower legs or feet. These tumors can potentially form almost anywhere in the body. They often begin as a small growth or bump and are usually painless. Sometimes, there are open sores on the skin above the tumor that may be mistaken for areas of infection. Eventually, multiple growths or bumps may develop. Epithelioid sarcoma can move into nearby tissue and spread to other areas of the body. This type of sarcoma tends to spread to lymph nodes. It often recurs after treatment.
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumorsThese tumors arise in the protective lining that covers the nerves of the peripheral nervous system. These are the nerves outside of the brain and spinal cord. They appear as a lump or mass and can develop throughout the body. They can cause pain, weakness or difficulty moving the affected body part. When they press up against (compress) nerves, they can cause a sensation of burning, tingling or numbness in certain areas. They tend to recur after treatment. They may be associated with a rare genetic disorder called neurofibromatosis type 1 but can also occur without a genetic predisposition.
MyxofibrosarcomaThis form of soft tissue sarcoma is usually found most often in the arms or legs. It begins as a slow-growing bump or bumps and can move into nearby tissue or spread to other areas of the body. They are usually painless. These tumors often recur after treatment. They usually develop in people over the age of 50 and occur slightly more often in men than women. It is one of the most common forms of sarcoma found in adult patients.
RhabdomyosarcomaOne of the most common types of soft tissue sarcoma, these tumors usually develop from cells which have features related to striated muscle cells. Striated muscle tissue is the muscle that is attached to the skeleton by tendons and is part of the voluntary muscle system. These are the muscles that are controlled by a person’s conscious thought as opposed to muscles that act involuntarily like the heart or muscles found within organs like the bladder or intestines.
Rhabdomyosarcomas arise from cells within the developing fetus called rhabdomyoblasts. These are immature cells that grow into the cells that help to form skeletal and striated muscle. These tumors can develop anywhere in the body, even areas of the body where there isn’t skeletal muscle tissue. The head and neck area, the urinary system including the bladder, the arms and legs, and the reproductive system including the vagina, uterus and testes are common sites of rhabdomyosarcoma development. The signs and symptoms depend on where the tumor is located.
Rhabdomyosarcomas are the most common form of soft tissue sarcoma in children. They are far more common in children but can sometimes occur in adults. Adults tend to have a faster growing form of the disorder.
Solitary fibrous tumorThese are individual, slow-growing tumors. Although they can develop almost anywhere in the body, they most often arise in the lining of the lungs (pleura), pelvis or the dura, which is the thick, outer layer of the three membranes (meninges) that cover and protect the brain and spinal cord. These tumors tend to grow very slowly and do not cause any symptoms until they are very large. Most are noncancerous (benign), but malignant (cancerous) tumors can develop.  Despite their name, these tumors can be multifocal.  The behavior of these tumors can vary with some tumors having a favorable course and some capable of local recurrence or metastasis.
Synovial sarcomaThis form of soft tissue sarcoma usually develops in the arms or legs, often near a joint but rarely, if ever, within a joint. It can also develop in the trunk or abdomen. They usually present as a small growth or lump and are sometimes associated with pain. Eventually, a synovial sarcoma can cause limitation in the movement of the nearby joint. Doctors do not know what type of cell causes synovial sarcoma. They are called synovial sarcomas because the cells of the tumor were felt to resemble cells of the synovium, which is a layer of connective tissue that lines joints. They most often occur in young adults. These tumors sometimes recur after treatment and are capable of metastasis.
Tenosynovial giant cell tumor is a tumor that arises from the lining of joints or the tendon sheath that covers a tendon.  It can be locally aggressive and recur after surgical resection.  If it recurs it can be the source of significant morbidity with pain and loss of function of the affected area.
Undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcomaThis is an aggressive form of soft tissue sarcoma that can develop in soft tissue or bone in any part of the body. These tumors tend to affect older adults in their 50s or older. They most often develop in the lower legs (especially the thighs), the upper arms, behind the membrane that lines the abdomen and covers the abdominal organs (retroperitoneum) and the main organs of the body, especially those of the abdomen (viscera). In childhood, they most often form in the head or neck. They usually grow quickly and often spread to other areas of the body, especially the lungs. They often cause pain or swelling in the affected area. They can recur after treatment. This form of soft tissue sarcoma was once referred to as malignant fibrous histiocytoma.

