Spinal Muscular Atrophy with Respiratory Distress Type 1

synonyms:
autosomal recessive distal spinal muscular atrophy 1sDHMN6diaphragmatic spinal muscular atrophydistal hereditary motor neuronopathy type VIdistal spinal muscular atrophy type 1DSMA1HMN6HMNVIsevere infantile axonal neuropathy with respiratory failureSIANRFSMARD1spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1

overview:
Summary
Spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1 (SMARD1) is an extremely rare type of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) that results from irreversible deterioration of alpha motor neurons of the spinal cord. Alpha motor neurons supply nerves to skeletal muscle and stimulate muscle contraction. The symptoms of SMARD1 primarily presents as infants having trouble breathing between the ages of 6 weeks and 6 months of age. Unless they are not supported with mechanical ventilation, most affected children die from respiratory failure before 13 months of age. Progression of muscle weakness typically stops within two years, but, in a young child, the consequences of severe neuromuscular weakness are progressive. SMARD1 is known to be caused by changes (called mutations or variants) in theIGHMBP2gene and is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. A majority of children with SMARD1 have early onset in infancy, but there have been many children reported with a later onset juvenile form of SMARD1.

Introduction

SMARD1 was first reported in medical literature in 1974 by Mellins, et al, who described two newborns presenting with an atypical variant of SMA type 1 (Wernig-Hoffmann disease). However, SMARD1 was not recognized as a separate disease from SMA until 1996. The first research showingIGHMBP2gene mutations in relation to the characteristics of SMARD1 was reported in 2001 by Grohmann, et al.

symptoms:
Symptoms of SMARD1 generally begin during infancy. Early features of SMARD1 include a weak cry, feeding problems, difficult and noisy breathing- especially when inhaling (inspiratory stridor) and recurrent pneumonia. Between 6 weeks and 6 months of age, affected infants typically experience sudden onset of shortness of breath with progressive respiratory distress. This is due to paralysis of the diaphragm, (primary inspiratory muscle) and abdomen resulting in ineffective breathing with an increased respiratory rate (tachypnea) and eventual inability to breathe (respiratory failure). Diaphragmatic paralysis can result from a dysfunction of the phrenic nerve that supplies the diaphragm. This paralysis (phrenic nerve palsy) usually starts on the right side although it can affect one or both halves of the diaphragm.
Following respiratory failure, muscle weakness occurs in muscles farther from the midline of the body (distal), usually beginning in the lower limbs, spreading to all muscles. The decline of muscle weakness stabilizes within two years. The retention of muscle function following this period is variable among individuals. Patients often experience complete paralysis of all limbs and trunk muscles.
Most affected individuals lose their deep tendon reflexes (areflexia) by the age of one. Children may also develop an abnormal sideways curvature of the spine (scoliosis), an excessive outward curvature of the spine (kyphosis), or both (kyphoscoliosis). Other features include a loss of bladder and bowel control (incontinence), irregular heartbeat (arrhythmia), low muscle tone (hypotonia), excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis), a reduced pain sensitivity, and deformities of feet and hands.
A variety of other symptoms and physical findings can develop in individuals with SMARD1:

Prenatal/Natal Features

• Intrauterine growth retardation (unborn not growing as expected)• Premature birth• Reduced fetal movements• Birth weight, length and head circumference values less than the 10th percentile (small for their gestational age)• Inability to gain weight or grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive)

Respiratory Abnormalities

• Respiratory paradox due to diaphragmatic weakness/paralysis• Respiratory failure• Persistent or recurrent atelectasis (collapse of lung segments or lobes) due to weak cough and reduced ability to clear respiratory secretions even without an illness.• Spine and chest wall deformities due to chest wall muscle involvement that further reduce respiratory efficiency

Orthopedic abnormalities

• Distal extremity deformities, such as clubfoot (talipes equinovarus)• Permanent flexion of the finger (camptodactyly of finger)• Front half of the foot turning inward (metatarsus varus)• Limitation of the range of motion of joints (joint contractures) in hands or feet (hand/foot arthrogryposis)o Wrist retractiono Elbow, ankle, and knee stiffness• Curved/bent fingers or toes (claw hands or toes)• Elbow, ankle, and knee stiffness.

Gastrointestinal features

• Excessive production of saliva (hyper salivation)• Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia)• Gastroesophageal reflux (persistent spitting up)• Inability of the stomach to empty food in the usual way (gastroparesis)• Inability to empty the bladder (urinary retention)• Constipation

Neuromuscular features

• Fatty finger pads• Loss of nerve supply to the diaphragm (denervation of the diaphragm)• Abnormal elevation of the diaphragm (diaphragmatic eventration)• Muscle wasting of arms and legs• Spinal muscle deterioration (spinal muscular atrophy)• Decreased nerve conduction velocity (slowed ability for nerves to send messages to parts of body)• Involuntary twitching of the tongue and weakness of facial muscles• Decreased degree of facial expression (hypomimia)

Other Characteristics

• Thoracospinal deformities (scoliosis, thoracic dystrophy)• Seizures occurring during or after a hypoxic or anoxic (little to no oxygen) episode• High blood pressure• Dislocated hip
Symptoms of SMARD1 is typically present in infancy, but there is a significant amount of variability in the timing of the onset, and numerous SMARD1 patients have been diagnosed later in childhood. Only a few have been reported with late onset or mild presentation.

