Spina Bifida

synonyms:
Neural Tube DefectSB

overview:
Spina bifida is characterized by incomplete closure of certain bones of the spinal column (vertebrae), leaving a portion of the spinal cord exposed. Part of the contents of the spinal canal may protrude through this opening. In the most severe form, rachischisis, the opening is extensive. Spina bifida may cause difficulties with bladder control, walking and/or other functions, depending on the severity of associated symptoms.

symptoms:
Patients with spina bifida have a wide variety of symptoms and physical findings, depending on the extent of the defect in the spine. The mildest form of the condition, spina bifida occulta, causes few if any symptoms, and may go undetected.  In this mild form, the lack of closure of the neural tube affects only a small area of the spine and is found on X-rays. The disorder may be suspected because of a dimple or tuft of hair on the back overlying the affected area.  Impaired bladder control is a common finding, even with relatively mild forms of the condition.
In more severe forms of spina bifida, a sac (meningocele or myelomeningocele) may push its way out through the opening.  A meningocele involves the meninges, the tough membrane that covers and protects the brain and cord.  This sac may be small or it may be as large as a grapefruit.  The meningocele may be covered with skin, or the nerve tissue may be exposed.  Generally the sac contains cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).  A myelomeningocele represents the most severe form of spina bifida and indicates that a portion of the spinal cord itself has pushed through the spinal (vertebral) opening into the sac in the back of the torso.
The malformation of the lower spinal cord causes abnormalities of the lower trunk and extremities of varying severity.  If the condition is mild, the person may only experience some muscle weakness and impaired skin sensations.  In patients with meningocele, accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid in the brain results in enlargement of the head (hydrocephalus) and possible brain damage.
Although spina bifida is usually present at birth, it occasionally is first seen during adolescence.   The rapid growth during this time stretches the shortened nerves and may cause progressive weakness.  Prenatal testing for spina bifida is available.  However, this test is not absolutely reliable.

