Spinal Muscular Atrophy

synonyms:
SMASMN-related SMAclassic SMAchromosome 5 SMA

overview:
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a group of inherited neuromuscular disorders characterized by loss of nerve cells in the spinal cord called lower motor neurons or anterior horn cells. Lower motor neurons originate in the brainstem or the spinal cord and relay nerve impulses from upper motor neurons, located in the brain, to the muscles they control. The loss of lower motor neurons leads to progressive muscle weakness, muscle wasting (atrophy) and low muscle tone (hypotonia) that is typically more pronounced in muscles closest to the trunk of the body (proximal muscles) such as the shoulders, hips and back. However, neurons controlling most voluntary muscles can be affected, including those that control muscles involved in feeding, swallowing and breathing.
The most common form of SMA is related to a deficiency of the SMN protein, caused by variants in theSMN1gene located in chromosome 5 (known as classic SMA or chromosome 5 SMA, or SMN-related SMA). Other forms of SMA are not related to a deficiency of SMN protein, arising instead from variants in different genes on different chromosomes. These forms vary greatly in severity and in the muscles most affected. This report focuses mainly on the classic form of SMA, the SMN-related spinal muscular atrophy.
Newborn screening facilitates early identification of infants with SMA so treatment can begin early. Infants identified by SMA newborn screening are urgently referred for confirmatory testing, discussion of treatments and care. Early treatment prior to the onset of symptoms provides the best outcomes.
Although the management of SMA was previously centered around symptom management and supportive care, since 2016, therapies that can improve the course of the disease (disease-modifying therapies) have emerged and have shown promising results. Currently three SMN-enhancing treatments have U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of SMA are a consequence of lower motor neuron loss. The features of lower motor neuron disease include muscle weakness and atrophy, hypotonia, decreased or absent reflexes (hypo- or areflexia) and twitching of muscle fibers (fasciculations). Although SMA is a disease spectrum, the five subtypes are determined based on their age of symptom onset and maximum motor function achieved. This classification for SMA was established prior to the availability of genetic testing and prior to the availability of disease modifying treatments.
SMA type 0, also known as prenatal SMA, is the most severe form of the disease and develops before birth. The first sign may be a decrease or loss of fetal movement during late pregnancy. Symptoms of SMA type 0 are apparent at birth and include severe weakness and hypotonia. In addition, joint deformity and tightening (contractures) and congenital heart defects are common. As a result, infants do not achieve developmental motor milestones. Because of severe respiratory muscle weakness, affected infants rapidly progress to respiratory failure often by the first month of life.
SMA type 1, also known as infantile SMA or Werdnig-Hoffmann disease, is the most common type of SMA affecting approximately 60% of infants born with SMA and is also a severe form of the disease. Infants with SMA type 1 usually appear normal at birth but experience severe weakness before 6 months of age. Developmentally they do not achieve independent sitting and may achieve very few developmental motor milestones. Because of lower motor neuron loss, affected infants have poor suck and swallow reflexes and respiratory muscle weakness. Historically without intervention, affected children die before two years of age due to progressive respiratory muscle weakness and respiratory failure.
SMA type 2, also known as intermediate SMA or Dubowitz disease, comprises about 30% of infants born with SMA. The disease usually manifests between 6 and 18 months of age. Affected children can sit independently at some point in their development. However, this ability is usually lost by the mid-teens or later and affected individuals never achieve independent standing and walking. Additional symptoms include difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) and respiratory difficulties. Trembling (tremor) of the fingers is also common. In addition, weakness of the muscles supporting the spine leads to curvature of the spine (scoliosis). Historically, life expectancy is reduced in patients with SMA type 2 but many reach adulthood.
SMA type 3, also known as juvenile SMA or Kugelberg-Welander disease, accounts for about 10% of infants born with SMA. The age of onset is variable and can be as early as 18 months or as late as teenage years. Although affected individuals have hip and leg weakness and may fall frequently, they are able to walk independently at some point in their development. However, the ability to walk and stand may be lost as they grow and with disease progression, and many become wheelchair dependent. Long-term prognosis depends on the degree of motor function attained as a child, and respiratory muscle weakness is typically mild or absent. SMA type 3 is associated with a normal life expectancy.
SMA type 4, also known as late-onset SMA, occurs in less than 1% of people with SMA. Symptoms are less severe than in other subtypes and onset typically occurs in adulthood and most commonly after 35 years of age. All motor developmental milestones are achieved and most individuals with SMA type 4 can walk throughout their life. Patients with SMA type 4 have a normal life .
The following resources from Cure SMA provides a description of symptoms, as well as videos to assist with early diagnosis:
https://smartmoves.curesma.org/
https://www.curesma.org/types-of-sma/

