Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia Tarda

synonyms:
SED tardaX-linked spondyloepiphyseal dysplasiaSEDLSEDTTRAPPC2-related X-linked spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda

overview:
Summary
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda (SEDT; SEDL) is a rare, hereditary skeletal disorder. Physical characteristics include moderate short stature (dwarfism), moderate-to-severe spinal deformities, barrel-shaped chest, disproportionately short trunk and premature osteoarthritis. It is inherited as an X-linked recessive disorder and typically only males will develop SEDT.
IntroductionSEDT commonly refers to the X-linked recessive form of the disorder, although rare autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive “tarda” forms have been described. In the 2023 revision of the Nosology of Genetic Skeletal Disorders, X-linked SEDT is referred to asTRAPPC2-related X-linked spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda and included in the group of conditions called spondyloepi(meta)physeal dysplasias.

symptoms:
Young boys with SEDT do not typically show signs of the condition and have otherwise normal height and body proportions until the age of 6 to 8 years old. Around this time, symptoms of the disorder begin to develop, hence the word “tarda” in SEDT which refers to the later onset of this condition.
At ages 6 to 8 years, the following symptoms may be seen: spine growth slows and eventually stops while the arms and legs continue to grow. This results in a disproportionately short trunk (the part of the body containing the chest, stomach and back) as well as height below normal for age (short stature). Arm growth can result in an arm span that exceeds the child’s height by 4 to 8 inches. The chest can become rounded and protrude outwards in a bulging manner (barrel-shaped chest).
Around puberty other symptoms may develop, but some of these may develop before puberty. These symptoms include a short neck and skeletal abnormalities of the spine that can cause rounding of the upper back (dorsal kyphosis) or an excessive inward curvature of the lower spine (lumbar hyperlordosis). These skeletal abnormalities can also cause a wearing down of the cartilage at the ends of the bones (osteoarthritis), often seen earliest in the hips but also in the joints of the back, knees, ankles and shoulders. Osteoarthritis can cause discomfort and pain. Where and when osteoarthritis develops varies between boys affected with SEDT.
Regarding the face, some boys may have a flatter appearance to their face (midface retrusion), but the head shape is usually normal.
By adulthood, men with SEDT tend to have normal sized head, hands and feet and normal limb lengths. However, a barrel-shaped chest, short stature and short trunk are more readily apparent. The final height of adults with SEDT typically ranges from 4’10” to 5’6”.
Males with SEDT reach normal motor and cognitive milestones and are expected to have a normal lifespan. While SEDT mostly affects males, rare cases of females with SEDT have been seen though they typically have mild symptoms.

