Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia, Congenital

synonyms:
SEDCSED, Congenital TypeSpondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia, Congenital Type

overview:
Summary
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita (SEDC) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by deformities that begin before birth (prenatally), including skeletal and joint malformations involving the spine, hips and knees, and abnormalities affecting the eyes. Such growth deformities lead to children being shorter than normally would be expected based upon their age and gender (short stature or dwarfism). Some individuals may develop hearing and vision problems. Additional findings can occur in some cases. Intelligence is unaffected. SEDC is caused by mutations in the type II collagen (COL2A1) gene. The disorder is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, but most cases occur due to a new (de novo) mutation with no previous family history.
Introduction
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia is a form of skeletal dysplasia (osteochondrodysplasia), a broad term for a group of disorders characterized by abnormal growth or development of cartilage or bone. SEDC is characterized by distinctive skeletal malformations affecting the long bones of the arms and legs as well as the bones of the spine (vertebrae). Characteristic involvement includes underdevelopment and fragmentation of the bone and cartilage of the epiphyses, which are the rounded ends or “heads” of the long bones, and underdevelopment or malformation of the vertebrae. There are two main forms of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, SEDC and spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda (SEDT).

symptoms:
The specific symptoms and severity of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita can vary greatly from one person to another. Affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below. In most cases, certain symptoms are noticeable at birth (congenital).
Growth deficiency that occurs before birth is a characteristic finding. Growth deficiency continues through childhood and results in disproportionate short stature. Short stature is when a child is below the average height for a person of the same age and gender. Disproportionate means that the arms appear long in relation to the torso. Affected individuals may also have a disproportionately short neck. The head, hands and feet are average-sized. Final adult height usually ranges between 2.8 and 4.2 feet (84-128cm).
In most cases, affected individuals have spinal malformations including abnormal forward curvature of the spine (lumbar lordosis) and/or abnormal roundback (kyphosis). Kyphosis may be accompanied by sideways curvature of the spine (scoliosis). Abnormal spinal curvature may worsen with age. Some individuals may have instability of the spine in the neck (cervical vertebrae), which can increase the risk of spinal injury in that area (cervical myelopathy). An individual with a stable cervical spine may develop instability later during life.
Stiffness and diminished joint mobility at the knees, elbows, and hips may develop over time. Joint abnormalities may lead to the development of hip deformity in which the thigh bone is angled toward the center of the body (coxa vara) and/or knee deformities, including bow legs (genu varum) and ‘knock knees’ (genu valgum). Individuals with SEDC are more likely to develop pain, inflammation and damage in affected joints at an early age (early-onset osteoarthritis). Dislocation of affect joints (e.g. dislocation of the hips) can also occur.
Affected individuals are prone to dislocation of neck bones, back pain, and compression of the sciatic nerve (sciatica), which runs from the lower back, behind the hips and buttocks and down each leg. Sciatica can cause pain, tingling and numbness along the sciatic nerve. A broad, barrel-shaped chest is common. Protrusion of the breastbone (sternum) and ribs may also occur (pectus carinatum). Children are more likely to have clubfeet at birth. Some affected individuals may experience difficulty straightening the arms and legs (limited extension).
Affected children may also exhibit diminished muscle tone (hypotonia) and muscle weakness, which, along with the spinal malformations, can result in delays in affected children learning to walk. In some cases, affected children may exhibit an unusual “waddling” manner of walking (abnormal gait).
In some cases, affected individuals also have an abnormally flat face, underdevelopment of the cheek bone (malar hypoplasia), and/or incomplete closure of the roof of the mouth (cleft palate). Eye abnormalities can also occur including widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), progressive nearsightedness (myopia) and, degeneration of the thick transparent substance that fills the center of the eyes (vitreous humor) and of the nerve-rich membrane lining the eye (retina), a condition known as vitreoretinal degeneration. Less often, affected individuals may develop detachment of the retina from the underlying tissue of the eye. Flashing lights or eye “floaters” may be the initial symptoms of retinal detachment. Individuals with severe nearsightedness (“high” myopia) are at a greater risk for retinal detachment than those without high myopia.
Children may develop progressive sensorineural hearing loss, in which sound vibrations are not properly transmitted to the brain due to a defect of the inner ear or the auditory nerve. Although intelligence is usually unaffected, there may be delay in children attaining certain developmental milestones.
Some infants with SEDC may experience breathing difficulties shortly after birth, particularly if they have an underdeveloped or extremely small rib cage. Breathing difficulties usually decrease as an infant grows older. In certain cases, abnormal curvature of the spine and an abnormally developed chest can lead to breathing difficulties by preventing the lungs to fully fill with air (restrictive lung disease). This can lead to chronic breathing issues, sleep apnea, chronic respiratory infections, and potentially heart failure in middle age. Prompt and appropriate treatment can reduce this risk.

