Spondylocostal Dysplasia

synonyms:
costovertebral dysplasiaJarcho-Levin syndrome (obsolete)spondylocostal dysostosisSCDSCDO

overview:
Summary
Spondylocostal dysplasia is a rare genetic disorder characterized by defects of the bones of the spine (vertebrae) and abnormalities of the ribs. Ribs can be fused or missing in chaotic patterns. These malformations are present at birth (congenital). The severity and specific symptoms can vary among affected individuals, even among members of the same family. Some infants may have difficulty breathing because of a reduced size of the thorax. The thorax is the middle portion of the body extending from the neck to the abdomen and including the chest cavity. Sometimes, breathing difficulties can be severe and life-threatening. Most times, spondylocostal dysplasia is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner and is caused by a change (mutation) in one of four genes,DLL3, MESP2, LFNG, HES7. Rarely, spondylocostal dysplasia can be inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. One gene,TBX6, is known to cause autosomal dominant spondylocostal dysplasia. Many individuals do not have a mutation in any of these genes. With treatment, most individuals survive well into adulthood.
Introduction
There is significant confusion in the medical literature regarding names for spondylocostal dysplasia. For years, this disorder and a similar disorder, spondylothoracic dysplasia, were considered the same disorder and referred to as Jarcho-Levin syndrome. Researchers now know that these disorders are separate entities with different causes and associated malformations. The term Jarcho-Levin syndrome is still used for both disorders, and sometimes it is used as an “umbrella” term to describe a broad range of conditions associated with spinal and rib defects. This has led to confusion for individuals and families who receive a diagnosis of Jarcho-Levin syndrome. Some researchers have advocated that Jarcho-Levin syndrome be reserved for people with spondylocostal dysplasia. Other researchers believe the widespread, inconsistent use of Jarcho-Levin syndrome has rendered the term obsolete and that its use should be discontinued. Jarcho and Levin were two doctors who first described what is now known as spondylothoracic dysplasia in the medical literature in 1938.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of spondylocostal dysplasia can vary greatly from one person to another, even among members of the same family. Affected individuals have abnormalities in the development of the spine and ribs.
The bones of the spine (vertebrae) may be fused together or misshapen. Sometimes, they are underdeveloped and wedge-shaped (hemivertebrae). Multiple vertebrae are always affected, usually at least 10 segments in a row (contiguously). The ribs may be fused together, misaligned, broadened, split or forked (bifid), and sometimes some of the ribs are missing. Boys have an increased risk of developing inguinal hernia, a condition characterized by protrusion of parts of the large intestine through an opening in the abdominal wall near the groin.
The trunk, which is the part of the body that extends from the neck to the abdomen, may be disproportionately smaller in comparison to their height. In addition, affected individuals may be shorter than would otherwise be expected for their age and gender (short stature). Affected individuals may have a short neck with limited mobility. Some individuals have abnormal sideways curvature of the spine, a condition called scoliosis. Scoliosis is usually mild, but, in rare instances, can be severe. Scoliosis usually does not get worse, but should be carefully followed with spine x-rays
Because of the malformation of the spine and ribs, the lungs of affected individuals may not be able to grow and develop properly. This is known as thoracic insufficiency syndrome. Affected infants and children cannot expand their chests sufficiently with causes reduced lung capacity, which means the lungs can hold less air than they normally would. Consequently, they can have difficulties breathing and experience repeated respiratory infections. Breathing problems are usually mild or moderate, but sometimes can become life-threatening and be fatal. Some children may develop high blood pressure of the pulmonary artery, which is the main artery that delivers blood to the lungs (pulmonary hypertension). Pulmonary hypertension is a chronic and, if not treated, life-threatening complication. Reduced lung capacity also increases the risk of heart failure another life-threatening complication.
Despite the potential for serious complications, most individuals with spondylocostal dysplasia live until adulthood. They may experience chronic back pain. Intelligence is usually unaffected, and neurological complications are rare.
Researchers are studying spondylocostal dysplasia to determine whether there are any genotype-phenotype correlations. Genotype is the distinct set of genes a person carries. Phenotype refers to the observable characteristics of a person. People with an alteredLFNGgene usually have the most severe shortening of the spine. People with an alteredHES7gene have improper separation (malsegmentation) of the bones of the entire spine. People with an alteredDLL3gene usually (but not always) have mild scoliosis that does not require surgical intervention.

