Spontaneous Intracranial Hypotension

synonyms:
spontaneous spinal cerebrospinal fluid leak

overview:
Summary
Spontaneous intracranial hypotension (SIH) is secondary to a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak at the level of the spine and the resulting loss of CSF volume that bathes the brain and spinal cord. Males and females of all ages are affected, but the diagnosis is more common in females. Annual incidence of 4 per 100,000 may be an underestimate, and the overall prevalence is unknown. It most often results in a new-onset headache that is worse with upright posture, along with other neurologic signs and symptoms. Variability in presenting signs and symptoms, along with low awareness of the disorder, contributes to delayed diagnosis, although this is improving with a growing volume of publications and interest among physicians. Diagnostic imaging is quite specialized, both in techniques and in interpretation. Because there is a structural cause, a hole or defect in the spinal dura (a tough layer of connective tissue) that normally holds cerebrospinal fluid in, it is both treatable and curable. The most common treatment is epidural patching with blood or fibrin sealant, though venous embolization is increasingly used, and surgery is sometimes needed. Outcomes are better with more prompt diagnosis and treatment. Despite good outcomes for many patients, a significant number continue to suffer for years to decades.

symptoms:
The onset of symptoms and signs may be relatively abrupt or more gradual. Patients may be minimally affected or profoundly disabled with limited ability to function while upright. Quality of life measures in this population are very poor. The hallmark of intracranial hypotension is a positional headache. This headache is worse when upright and improves when lying down. It usually occurs within 15 minutes of assuming the upright position and is relieved after lying down within 15-30 minutes, however it may take hours to worsen or improve with change of position. Over time, the positional aspect of the headache tends to lessen and may even disappear. Headache is not universally positional and may be absent. The location of the headache is most often in the back of the head or base of the skull, but can also occur in the front, sides or all over the head. The headache is rarely on just one side of the head. The quality of the headache is often described as a “pulling sensation” from the back of the head to the neck although many other qualities are reported. The severity of the headache can range from mild to very severe and disabling.
Other characteristic symptoms include neck pain, neck stiffness, nausea, vomiting, sensitivity to light and/or sound, sense of imbalance, ringing in the ears, changes in hearing and profound fatigue. Pain between the shoulder blades and into the upper arms is commonly reported. Patients may also experience visual changes, dizziness or vertigo, facial numbness or pain, or changes in taste. Similar to head pain, these symptoms are often more severe with upright posture.
Specific signs are often seen on brain MRI and are described below under the diagnosis section.
Atypical and serious neurologic complications do occur, so prompt recognition and treatment in such cases is important. Rarely, patients can present with signs and symptoms typical of behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia, Parkinsonism, superficial siderosis, ataxia (very unsteady gait) or bibrachial amyotrophy. Spinal cord herniation, cerebral venous thrombosis, stupor or coma, seizures, stroke and death have also been reported.

