Spondylothoracic Dysplasia

synonyms:
Lavy-Moseley syndromeSTDspondylothoracic dysostosis

overview:
Summary
Spondylothoracic dysplasia (STD) is a rare disorder in which there are malformations affecting the spine and ribs. The portion of the spine supporting the chest is extremely shortened. These malformations are present at birth (congenital). The bones of the spine called the vertebrae do not develop properly, and commonly fuse together with the adjacent ribs fusing to the spine. On an x-ray this gives the thorax a crab-like shape. The thorax is the portion of the body extending from the neck to the abdomen and includes the cavity surrounded by the ribs, breastbone and certain vertebrae. The shortened chest can restrict the size of the lungs, causing thoracic insufficiency syndrome. Spondylothoracic dysplasia can cause severe breathing (respiratory) problems and infants are at risk of life-threatening respiratory failure. Affected individuals are shorter than would otherwise be expected based on their age and gender (short stature) and may have an abnormal curvature to the spine. Many people with spondylothoracic dysplasia have a change (mutation) in theMESP2gene. This gene change is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
Introduction
There is significant confusion in the medical literature regarding names for spondylothoracic dysplasia. For years, this disorder and a similar disorder, spondylocostal dysplasia (were considered the same disorder and referred to as Jarcho-Levin syndrome. Researchers now know that these disorders are separate entities with different causes and associated malformations. The term Jarcho-Levin syndrome is still used for both disorders, and sometimes it is used as an “umbrella” term to describe a broad range of conditions associated with spinal and rib defects. This has led to confusion for individuals and families who receive a diagnosis of Jarcho-Levin syndrome. Some researchers have advocated that Jarcho-Levin syndrome be reserved for people with spondylocostal dysplasia and the eponym Lavy-Moseley syndrome be used for spondylothoracic dysplasia. Other researchers believe the widespread, inconsistent use of Jarcho-Levin syndrome has rendered the term obsolete and that its use should be discontinued. Jarcho and Levin were two doctors who first described what is now known as spondylothoracic dysplasia in the medical literature in 1938.

symptoms:
The spine and ribs do not develop properly in spondylothoracic dysplasia. The bones of the spine are malformed and may be fused together. This fusion occurs where the head of the rib bones connects to the bones of the thoracic spine. The thoracic spine is the portion of the spinal column that makes up the upper and lower back. Because of the abnormal fusion of these bones, the affected area has a crab-like shape on x-rays. The spine can be markedly shorter than normal. Some individuals with STD may have an abnormal curve to the spine. The spine may be s-shaped (scoliosis), abnormally curved inward (lordosis), or abnormally curved outward (kyphosis), causing the back to appear rounded. Most patients with STD have a short straight spine.
The trunk, which is the part of the body that extends from the neck to the abdomen, may be disproportionately smaller in comparison to height. In addition, affected individuals may be shorter than would otherwise be expected for their age and gender (short stature). Affected individuals may have a short neck with limited mobility.
Because of the malformation of the spine and ribs, the lungs of affected infants and children may not be able to grow and develop properly. Affected infants and children cannot expand their chests sufficiently, causing reduced lung capacity, which means the lungs can hold less air than they normally would. Consequently, people with this condition can have difficulties breathing and experience repeated respiratory infections. Breathing problems can be severe and can become life-threatening and be fatal. Reduced lung capacity can also increase the risk of heart failure.
There is an increased risk of developing inguinal hernia, a condition characterized by protrusion of parts of the large intestine through an opening in the abdominal wall near the groin as well as protrusion of parts of the large intestine through an opening near the belly button (umbilical hernia).

