Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia, Kondo-Fu Type

synonyms:
SEDFK

overview:
Summary
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, Kondo-Fu type (SEDKF) is a rare genetic skeletal disorder caused by changes (mutations) in a gene named membrane bound transcription factor peptidase, site 1 (MBTPS1).MBTPS1contains the information for the body to make a protein called site-1 protease (S1P), which is considered a master regulator of various cellular functions. Affected individuals have low birth weight and their growth milestones are delayed. Abnormal bone development progresses through childhood which results in short stature, curvature of the spine and characteristic facial features. Common non-skeletal symptoms include early onset of cataracts, inguinal hernia and feeding difficulties in early childhood. The skeletal abnormalities of SEDKF overlap with some other rare bone diseases. Normal intelligence and an increased level of lysosomal enzymes in the blood can differentiate SEDKF from similar bone diseases. However, the final diagnosis should be based on genetic testing demonstrating mutations in theMBTPS1gene. There are currently no therapies that target the cause of SEDKF. Patients can be managed with symptomatic and supportive treatment.
Please note that SEDKF was only recently discovered and only a few patients have been identified so far. Thus, the symptoms described here are based on limited information, and understanding of this disease is still evolving.
Introduction
The first child with aMBTPS1gene mutation was reported in 2018 by a group of doctors and scientists in Oklahoma, US. This patient showed signs of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia (SED, conditions that primarily affect the development of bones in the spine and the ends of long bones in legs and arms). Thus, the disease was named SED, Kondo-Fu type, after Drs. Yuji Kondo and Jianxin Fu, two scientists who authored the published report. Since then, a total of seven patients with SEDFK have been identified in the US, Brazil and Germany.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms and severity of SEDKF can vary from one person to another, possibly depending on where the change happens in theMBTPS1gene. In addition, affected individuals may not have all possible symptoms discussed here. Some common manifestations are delayed growth, short stature, curvature of the spine, dysmorphic face, early onset of cataracts, bilateral inguinal hernia and gastrointestinal problems. Please note that prior to 2021, only eight patients had been identified as having mutations inMBTPS1. Thus, the relative frequency of the described symptoms is based on a small number of patients.
Patients can be born at full term but with relatively low birth weight. Delayed growth and gross motor milestones are noticeable soon after birth, and deformity of spine and face progress through childhood. Patients exhibit short stature with curvature of the spine, bulging of chest (pectus carinatum) and characteristic dysmorphic facial features including prominent forehead, prominent cheekbones, small lower jaw which is set further back than the upper jaw (retromicrognathia) and large ears. Due to weak bones and, in some cases, low muscle tone, patients may complain of back pain and fatigue, and display waddling gait. Some uncommon musculoskeletal changes have been recorded, including funnel chest, outward turning of the heel or inversion of the foot (pes valgus), expanded gap between the great toe and the rest of the toes (sandal grooves), joint hypermobility and hip joint inflammation.
Some patients experience digestive system problems and have difficulties in nutrition absorption. They require feeding support for survival in early childhood and suffer from chronic constipation.
Patients usually have normal speech, hearing and intelligence. Some relatively rare symptoms include seizures, temporary vision loss caused by reduced blood flow in the eye (ocular migraines), ovarian cysts, mild bluish coloration of the whites of the eyes (blue sclerae), reduced sweating, dry skin, skin follicular papules, brittle hair and hair loss.

