Sporadic Porencephaly

overview:
Sporadic porencephaly is a rare disorder affecting the central nervous system. In porencephaly, cysts or cavities form on the surface of the brain. These cysts or cavities may become filled with cerebrospinal fluid, a colorless fluid that normally surrounds the brain and spinal cord to provide protection and nourishment. The severity and associated symptoms of porencephaly vary dramatically from one person to another based upon the size and exact locations of the fluid-filled cavities or cysts. Some infants develop serious complications shortly after birth; other individuals may have mild symptoms that may go undetected.
Porencephaly may be classified as sporadic or familial. Sporadic porencephaly can have many different causes including infection just before or just after birth (perinatal infection), trauma, maternal disease or sickness, maternal diabetes, or maternal use of alcohol or drugs such as cocaine during pregnancy. A distinct genetic form of porencephaly (not covered in this report) occurs due to changes (variants or mutations) of theCOL4A1gene.
The terminology regarding porencephaly used in the medical literature has caused confusion. Some researchers break down porencephaly into type I (also known as encephaloclastic porencephaly) and porencephaly type II (also known as schizencephaly).

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of sporadic porencephaly vary greatly from one individual to another based on the size and exact location of the fluid-filled cyst or cavity. Some individuals may only have minor physical complications and intelligence may be unaffected; others can have severe, disabling complications.
Symptoms that can potentially develop in association with porencephaly include delays in growth and development, diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), seizures, and microcephaly or macrocephaly, conditions in which head circumference is either smaller (micro) or larger (macro) than would be expected in a child based upon age and weight.
Additional findings that have been reported with porencephaly include poor speech development or absent speech, paralysis of one side of the body (hemiplegia), abnormal tightening or shortening of certain muscles, resulting in restricted or stiff movements (contractures) and varying degrees of intellectual disability. Some individuals develop hydrocephalus, a condition in which accumulation of excessive cerebrospinal fluid in the skull causes pressure on the tissues of the brain, resulting in a variety of symptoms.

