Sporadic Inclusion Body Myositis

synonyms:
sIBMIBMinclusion body myositis

overview:
Sporadic inclusion body myositis (sIBM) is an acquired progressive muscle disorder that becomes apparent during adulthood. The symptoms and progression of sIBM vary from one person to another. In most cases, sIBM is characterized by progressive weakness and degeneration (atrophy) of the muscles especially those of the arms and the legs. sIBM can progress to cause severe disability. sIBM is an autoimmune disease mediated by cytotoxic T cells, but the exact cause of the disorder is unknown. sIBM, like all autoimmune diseases, is a complex disorder and, most likely, multiple factors including genetic, immunological and environmental ones in combination all play a role in its development.

symptoms:
The distribution, severity and progression of muscle weakness vary from one person to another. In some patients, sIBM may affect one arm or leg more than the other. In most cases, the progression is very slow. The muscles of the anterior thighs (quadriceps) and wrist and finger flexors are usually affected more severely than other muscles. Many individuals with sIBM first present with a tendency to trip or fall or with difficulty with handgrip, or with difficulty swallowing.
Muscles in the wrists, fingers, and neck are commonly affected. Weakness in the hands may be the first noticeable symptoms in some people. Muscle weakness in the fingers can affect the grip making it difficult to perform functions such as gripping a golf club. Eventually, affected individuals may have difficulty manipulating objects with their hands such as turning a key, buttoning a shirt, or writing with a pen or pencil. In rare cases, muscle weakness in the neck can cause the head to drop.
Weakness of the muscles below the knees can cause the toes to catch when walking or the foot to drop increasing an affected individual’s tendency to fall. Affected individuals may also have trouble walking up stairs and or rising from a sitting position.
Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) due to weakness of throat muscles may occur in individuals with sIBM. Dysphagia can potentially cause choking episodes. Facial muscle weakness occurs in some patients as well.
Muscle cramping, pain (myalgia) or tenderness do not usually occur, but has been reported. Although sIBM progresses slowly, it can eventually cause significant disability and many affected individuals eventually require an assistive device such as a cane, walker or wheelchair.

