Staphylococcal Scalded Skin Syndrome

synonyms:
Ritter Diseasescalded skin syndromeRitter von Ritterschein diseaseSSSS

overview:
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS) is a disorder that develops because of a toxin produced by a staphylococcal infection. A toxin is a harmful substance that causes disease when it enters tissues of the body. In SSSS the toxin spreads to the skin through the blood stream and specifically binds to desmoglein 1, an adhesion molecule target protein very high in the epidermis (outer layer of the skin) producing total body reddening of the skin and blistering and sloughing of the skin resembling a hot water burn or scalding of the skin. The top layer of the skin may peel off and shed. Affected individuals may also experience nonspecific symptoms such as fever (usually low grade), chills and weakness. Unlike similar disorders that cause a scalded skin appearance, the mucous membranes are not affected. Infants and younger children are most susceptible, because they lack antibodies to the toxin and may be slow to clear the toxin-antibody complex in their immature kidneys, but the disorder can also occur in certain older children or adults such as people who have compromised immune systems or insufficient kidney (renal) function. Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome is caused by toxins produced by certain strains (most commonly phage group 2 strains 55 and 71) of the bacterial germStaphylococcus aureus.

symptoms:
Initial symptoms can include fever (usually low grade), generalized redness and tenderness of the skin. The onset of symptoms is usually rapid. Some individuals may experience nonspecific symptoms that develop before the skin symptoms including a sore throat and inflammation of the eyelids known as conjunctivitis.
Initially the affected skin may have a sandpaper-like feel before becoming red and wrinkled. Areas prone to movement are most commonly initially involved. In children, the area around the mouth, eyes and ears is often affected. In infants, the diaper area and the area around the bellybutton are most often affected. The rash spreads rapidly with a propensity to affect the area around the mouth (perioral area) and areas where the skin creases, especially on the legs, arms, groin and neck. The top layer of the epidermis, which is the top layer of the skin, may separate (detach) from the underlying layers resulting in loose blisters and shallow erosions (sores). Affected skin may slough off in sheets. Sloughing results in the exposure of moist, reddish tissue very close to the top of the epidermis and gives the skin a scalded or burned appearance. The application of gentle pressure to the skin will also cause sloughing which is known as a Nikolsky sign.
Affected individuals may also experience additional symptoms including chills, weakness, aches and pain of the joints and muscles, fluid loss through the damaged skin and a general feeling of poor health (malaise). The loss of the top of the epidermis, which serves as a protective barrier, carries a risk of developing sepsis, a serious, potentially life-threatening infection of the blood and tissues of the body. However, in otherwise healthy children the risk of sepsis is rare. Pneumonia can also potentially occur.
The severity of the disorder is highly variable. Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome can cause mild disease or potentially it can progress to cause life-threatening complications. Such severe complications are rare in children, with the mortality rate below 5%. However, the mortality rate is higher in adults, due primarily to additional factors including the presence of other health issues (e.g., weakened immune system, poor kidney health).

