STEC Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome

synonyms:
classic hemolytic uremic syndromediarrhea-associated (D+) hemolytic uremic syndromeshigatoxin-associated hemolytic uremic syndromeStx HUS [STEC HUS]STEC HUStypical HUS

overview:
The hemolytic uremic syndrome is defined by the sudden occurrence of acute hemolytic anemia with fragmented red blood cells, low levels of platelets in the blood (thrombocytopenia), and acute kidney injury. Hemolytic uremic syndrome is a general term that covers five main subtypes STEC (typical), atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome [complement dysregulation], Sp HUS (Streptococcal pneumonia associated HUS) and metabolic causes of HUS. This report covers STEC (typical) hemolytic uremic syndrome, which is most often associated withE. coliinfection and bloody diarrhea. NORD has a separate report on the rarer atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome, which is not caused by infection withE. coliand is often the result of a genetic mutation.
Typical hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) is an uncommon disease that occurs in 5 to 15 percent of individuals, especially children, who are infected by the Escherichia coli (E. coli) bacterium, usually O157:H7 but also 0104:H4. This organism releases toxins into the gut that are absorbed into the bloodstream and may be transported by white blood cells (leukocytes) to the kidneys. This results in acute renal injury. There may also be damage to the brain with seizures and even coma, the pancreas with pancreatitis and occasionally diabetes mellitus, and other organs.
STEC HUS mainly affects young children between one and 10 years. More recently large numbers of adults were affected by STEC HUS in Europe [serotype 0104:H4]. The onset of HUS is preceded by an illness characterized by vomiting, abdominal pain, fever, and, usually, bloody diarrhea.

symptoms:
The symptoms and severity of STEC HUS vary greatly from one person to another. The disorder can be mild or it can progress to cause life-threatening complications. Most children with STEC HUS recover without permanent damage; however, about a small percent recover with complications. Chronic complications include chronic kidney disease, proteinuria, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, gall stones, neurological deficits.
The symptoms of STEC HUS are usually preceded by infection of the digestive tract (gastroenteritis) characterized by abdominal cramps and pain, fever and diarrhea. Diarrhea eventually becomes bloody within a few days. Nausea and vomiting also occur in many cases. Approximately 3 to 10 days after the development of gastroenteritis, additional symptoms appear including sudden onset of paleness (pallor), irritability, weakness, diminished excretion of urine (oliguria) or no urine [anuria], and lack of energy (lethargy). In some cases, seizures also occur during this initial phase.
Some infants may also develop small, unexplained bruises, small red or purple, pinhead-sized spots on the skin or mucous membranes (petechiae), and, rarely, bleeding from the nose or mouth.
Almost all affected persons have kidney injury and more than half of the children with STEC HUS develop impaired kidney (renal) function that may progress to renal failure and require dialysis. STEC HUS is the most common cause of acute renal failure in young children that is not related to complications of treatment of procedures. Renal failure is characterized by an inability of the kidneys to process waste products from the blood and excrete them in the urine, regulate the balance of salt and water in the body, excrete potassium, acids [metabolic acidosis] and phosphorus, and perform other vital functions such as control of blood pressure and production of erythropoietin and calcitriol. Acute renal failure may result in diminished amounts of urine [oliguria, anuria]; blood in the urine (hematuria); excess concentrations of protein in the urine (proteinuria), high blood pressure (hypertension); an abnormal accumulation of fluid between layers of tissue under the skin (edema); In some cases, acute renal failure may lead to life-threatening complications such as severe acidosis, high potassium and very low sodium levels.
Most individuals with STEC HUS completely recover from the renal failure. However, approximately 10 percent of affected individuals may develop chronic renal failure. This is extremely uncommon after recovery from an episode of STEC HUS. Those who have severe permanent kidney damage with proteinuria, elevated blood pressures and an increase in serum creatinine concentrations may have progressive loss of kidney function approximately five to 10 years after the acute episode. A small percentage of patients will require chronic dialysis and kidney transplantation.
Some individuals with STEC HUS develop symptoms associated with the central nervous system including (as mentioned above) the sudden onset of lethargy and irritability and seizures. Additional CNS symptoms include an impaired ability to control voluntary movements (ataxia), weakness on one side of the body (hemiparesis), confusion, and coma.
The pancreas may become involved in STEC HUS. The pancreas is an important organ located behind the stomach that secretes enzymes that aid in digestion. The pancreas also secretes insulin, which helps break down sugar. Pancreatic involvement is usually mild, but fluid accumulation in the pancreas (pseudocysts) and destruction of pancreatic tissue (necrosis) can occur. In about 3 percent of patients, insulin-dependent diabetes can develop. A small number of patients may develop gall bladder stones.

