Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis

synonyms:
epidermal necrolysis

overview:
Summary
Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) are rare severe cutaneous (skin) adverse drug reactions. They represent a spectrum of disease and are differentiated primarily based on body surface area (BSA) involvement​, ​although they can both be life-threatening. The consensus definition published in 1993 states that SJS affects less than 10% of the body surface area, while TEN affects more than 30% of the body surface area. The term SJS/TEN-overlap syndrome is used to describe cases in which 10%-30% of the body surface area is involved. The reaction may start with a ​​fever and non-specific​​ flu-like symptoms followed by the appearance of erythematous macules (red spots) that may cover a large part of the body, and painful blistering of the skin and mucous membranes with possible involvement of the eyes, lips, mouth, nose and genitalia. Internal organ involvement may occur and lead to multi-organ failure.
Numerous drugs have been reported to cause SJS and TEN, namely allopurinol, anticonvulsants (anti-epileptics), sulfonamide medications, antibiotics such as minocycline, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs​, anti-HIV and anti-tuberculosis (TB) medications. However, approximately 25% of cases are not drug-induced but are caused by infections or deemed idiopathic (of unknown cause).
Individuals with suspected SJS or TEN should immediately stop taking the suspected offending drug and all non-essential medications. Prompt recognition and early ​hospitalization to provide supportive and pharmacological treatment ​are essential. It is also important to note that ​​​survivors of SJS/TEN suffer from ​​​​long-term emotional and physical complications.
Introduction
SJS and TEN are classified as severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCAR), a subcategory of adverse drug reactions that can be life-threatening and are immunologically mediated. The disorders discussed in this report are generally broken down into SJS, SJS/TEN overlap and TEN. SJS was first described in the medical literature in 1922 by doctors A.M. Stevens and F.C. Johnson. The term toxic epidermal necrolysis was introduced in the medical literature in 1956 by Dr. A. Lyell and is also known as Lyell syndrome.

symptoms:
Most cases of SJS/TEN begin with the development of general, non-specific symptoms including flu-like symptoms, fever, burning or stinging of the eyes, body aches and discomfort or difficulty swallowing. Additional non-specific symptoms include headaches, chills, joint pain and a general feeling of poor health (malaise). A pus-producing (purulent) cough that also brings up mucous, phlegm and saliva (sputum) may also occur. These symptoms ​usually ​precede the development of skin involvement by a few days and​ characteristically ​happen ​​​one to eight​​ weeks after exposure to the trigger.
The initial skin manifestation is often the development of a superficial reddening of the skin (erythema) or reddish spots on the skin (macules) which can look ​purple ​(violaceous​)​​ in darker skin tones. These lesions often rapidly spread (​coalesce). In some people, these lesions may resemble ​a bull’s eye, so-called “target” lesions. ​ The rash may be itchy (pruritic)​ but is usually ​​painful. Blisters ​may ​appear ​​leading to detachment and sloughing of the skin, leaving open wounds (erosions).
Skin involvement is often accompanied by inflammation of the ​external ​​mucous membranes such as the ​mouth, lips, eyes and genitalia. Blisters may​ also​ form on ​internal mucous membranes of the body including the lining inside of the mouth (stomatitis), nose, airway, esophagus, urinary tract and ​internal genital​ia​​​. Mucous membrane involvement can precede or follow skin symptoms and often begins with soreness, then little blisters that rupture and leave erosions that may bleed and be painful. Involvement of the lips and inside of the mouth can result in painful mucosal lesions and extensive ulceration which are usually associated with crusted, bleeding lips and this can make eating difficult. Lesions in the genitourinary tract can cause diminished urine flow or an inability to pass urine due to pain. Airway involvement can cause discomfort or difficulty with breathing and may predispose to upper respiratory tract infections. Involvement of the eyes can cause pain, redness, weeping and crusting of the eyelids. Affected individuals may also experience pain and reddish discoloration in the whites of the eyes​ (sclera)​. Conjunctivitis, which is inflammation of the thin, clear membrane that lines the inner surface of the eyelids and the outer surface of the eye​, is common. Swelling due to fluid accumulation (eyelid edema) may also occur. Eye crusts may form and there may be a sensation of sand or grit in the eyes. Affected individuals may be abnormally sensitive to light (photophobia). Skin and mucous membrane involvement initially can be mild, or it can rapidly progress in severity. Eventually, the upper layer of the skin (epidermis) may pull away (detach) from the lower layer (dermis), leaving erosions. In SJS, this affects less than 10% of the body surface area while in TEN there is more widespread skin involvement with more than 30% of body surface area affected by skin loss. SJS/TEN-overlap is characterized by 10-30% of body surface area involvement. Scarring and secondary infection may occur in the affected areas if not treated appropriately. Affected individuals can potentially develop sepsis, a widespread, life-threatening condition that results from infection spreading in the blood and/or other body tissues, leading to a widespread inflammatory reaction in the body and potential systemic organ dysfunction. Individuals with TEN may resemble patients with severe burns in physical appearance, metabolic abnormalities and high critical care needs.​ The mortality rate of SJS/TEN is 10-30%. ​
Late Complications
​​​Most individuals who survive SJS or TEN will suffer from long-term emotional and physical complications​. Long-term skin issues can include itching (pruritus), excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis) and abnormal dryness of the skin. Abnormal lightening or darkening of affected areas of skin (hypopigmentation and hyperpigmentation, respectively) and scarring can occur secondary to skin inflammation. Permanent loss of nail beds may occur, or the fingernails and toenails may grow back abnormally (onychodystrophy). Chronic eye abnormalities can include chronic inflammation, abnormal dryness of the cornea (corneal xerosis), dry eye syndrome, folding inward of one or both eyelids (entropion), inverted eyelashes (trichiasis) and one or both eyelids may become stuck to the eye surface (symblepharon). Eye tissue can be significantly damaged resulting in scarring, vision loss and in rare cases, blindness. Involvement of the mucous membranes lining the respiratory and digestive tracts can lead to lung damage, bronchitis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and scarring of the esophagus. Dental complications including dry mouth (xerostomia), inflammation of the gums and gum disease have been observed due to changes in the quantity and quality of saliva. Genitourinary abnormalities can include urethral erosions and inflammation of the head of the penis (balanitis) in males and narrowing of the opening of the vagina and abnormal sticking together (adhesion) of the vaginal lips (labia) so that the vagina appears narrow or closed (vaginal synechia) in females. Urethral erosions and scarring or narrowing may also occur in females. ​​​
​​​Emotional long-term complications are common in SJS/TEN survivors. Survivors are reported to experience a high rate of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), anxiety and depression. One study estimated that over 50% of survivors screen positive for depression, over 40% of survivors screen positive for anxiety and about 20% of survivors screen positive for ​PTSD. Emotional complications are important to assess and treat appropriately.

