Stiff Person Syndrome

synonyms:
Moersch-Woltman syndromestiff-man syndromeSMSSPS

overview:
Stiff person syndrome (SPS) is a rare acquired neurological disorder that most often causes progressive muscle stiffness (rigidity) and repeated episodes of painful muscle spasms. Muscular rigidity often fluctuates (i.e., grows worse and then improves) and usually occurs along with the muscle spasms. Spasms may occur randomly or can be triggered by a variety of different events or circumstances including a sudden noise, light physical contact or when exposed to cold. The severity and progression of SPS varies from one person to another. If left untreated, SPS can potentially progress to cause difficulty walking and significantly impact a person’s ability to perform routine, daily tasks. Although the exact cause of SPS is unknown, it is thought to be an autoimmune disorder and sometimes occurs along with other autoimmune disorders (e.g., thyroid disease, diabetes, pernicious anemia [b12 deficiency], and vitiligo).
SPS has been described in the medical literature under many different, confusing names. Originally described as stiff man syndrome, the name was changed to reflect that the disorder can affect individuals of any age, race, ethnicity and gender. Like other autoimmune disorders, the majority of individuals with the condition are females. SPS is considered by many clinicians and researchers to be a spectrum of diseases ranging from the involvement of just one area of the body to a widespread, rapidly progressive form that also includes involvement of the brain, brain stem and spinal cord.

symptoms:
The characteristic symptoms associated with SPS are progressive, fluctuating muscular rigidity that occurs along with muscle spasms. The severity and progression of SPS can vary from one person to another. The symptoms usually develop over a period of months to years and may remain stable for many years or slowly worsen. In some people, symptoms can be stabilized or improved through medication and non-medication interventions. Affected individuals should talk to their physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall treatment plan.
Affected individuals may initially experience aching discomfort, stiffness, or pain, especially in the lower back, hips, and/or legs (predominantly in the classic type). Early on, stiffness may come and go, but it can gradually become fixed. The shoulders, arms, and/or neck may also be affected and less commonly the face. As the disease progresses, stiffness of the leg muscles (and other body regions) develops and can be more pronounced on one side than the other (asymmetrical). This leads to a slow, stiff manner of walking. As stiffness increases, affected individuals may develop an increasingly arched lower back due to inward curving of the lower spine (hyperlordosis).
In addition to muscular rigidity/stiffness, individuals with SPS also develop muscle spasms, which may occur for no apparent reason (spontaneously) or in response to various triggering events (i.e., stimuli). Spasms can be triggered by unexpected or loud noises, minor physical contact, cold environments, stress or situations that cause a heightened emotional response. Muscle spasms are often very painful and usually worsen existing stiffness. The spasms may involve the entire body or only a specific body region. The legs are often involved, which may lead to falls. Spasms of abdominal muscles may lead to individuals feeling bloated and constricted around their torso. Spasms involving the chest and respiratory muscles can be serious, potentially requiring emergency medical treatment with ventilatory support. However, this is uncommon as most people who have respiratory symptoms with spasms just feel short of breath without respiratory compromise.
In general, muscle spasms last seconds to several minutes, but occasionally can last for hours. Sudden withdrawal of medication in individuals with SPS may result in a life-threatening situation with overwhelmingly severe muscle spasms. Sleep usually suppresses the frequency of spasms.
In some people, SPS becomes severe enough to affect an individual’s ability to perform daily activities and routines. Some individuals may need to use a device such as a cane, walker or wheelchair. Some affected individuals experience intense anxiety when they need to cross large, open areas unassisted (agoraphobia) and become reluctant to go outside. If left untreated, SPS can potentially progress to cause significant disability and result in secondary complications from immobility.
Expanding Clinical Spectrum of SPSSeveral sets of characteristics (phenotypes) of SPS have been reported in the medical literature. This suggests that SPS represents a spectrum of diseases ranging from the involvement of one specific, localized body region to widespread involvement. These phenotypes include classic SPS, partial (or focal) SPS, SPS-plus, progressive encephalomyelitis with rigidity and myoclonus (PERM) and overlapping syndromes.
Classic SPS is characterized by muscle stiffness and painful spasms involving the torso and legs (more than arms). This phenotype is the most common type and often presents with asymmetrical limb involvement. The onset of symptoms is typically gradual and slow. Not all individuals will have an excessive curvature of the lower spine (hyperlordosis) and early on people with SPS may have normal exams.
Partial or focal SPS is characterized by the localized involvement of one limb, usually a leg (stiff limb syndrome) or the torso (stiff torso [trunk] syndrome). The stiffness and muscle spasms are similar to those found in classic SPS. Partial SPS may progress to classic SPS (affecting both legs and torso) leading to increased difficulty walking and subsequent falls.
SPS-plus is characterized by having classic SPS features (limb and back stiffness and spasms) plus brainstem and/or cerebellar involvement. Affected individuals can experience double vision, nystagmus, vertigo, incoordination (ataxia), speech issues (dysarthria) and/or swallowing problems (dysphagia) along with musculoskeletal symptoms. Onset of symptoms vary and often slowly worsen over time. Many individuals with SPS-plus will require help with walking and are at high risk of falling.
Progressive encephalomyelitis with rigidity and myoclonus (PERM) is characterized by stiffness and painful muscles that are similar to those seen in individuals with classic SPS. PERM is thought to have a more rapid onset of symptoms (days to several weeks) and progress quicker than other forms of SPS. However, some individuals will develop symptoms over months to years. Stiffness and spasms may occur along with, before or after the development of other symptoms including vertigo, a lack of coordination of voluntary muscles (ataxia), difficulty speaking (dysarthria) and confusion/seizures. In many patients, paralysis of certain eye movements (ophthalmoplegia), nystagmus, difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) and autonomic dysfunction (labile blood pressure and heart rate) occur.  Myoclonus also occurs in individuals with PERM. Myoclonus is a general term used to describe the sudden, involuntary jerking of a muscle or group of muscles caused by muscle contractions (positive myoclonus) or muscle relaxation (negative myoclonus). The twitching or jerking of muscles cannot be controlled by the person experiencing it. PERM is considered a distinct disorder from classic SPS and SPS-plus and some think it is a distinct condition all together. There is no evidence that other phenotypes of SPS will inevitably evolve into PERM.
There are overlapping syndromes that do not fit perfectly within the other phenotypes. Affected individuals can have a variety of features that are commonly seen in the previously described phenotypes along with other features including predominantly cerebellar symptoms, epilepsy, encephalitis, amongst others.

