Stomach Cancer

synonyms:
adenocarcinoma of the stomachgastroesophageal junction cancergastric cancer

overview:
Stomach cancer is a general term for cancer affecting the stomach. Generally, it refers to cancer that arises from the cells lining the stomach. These cells, like all cancerous cells, exhibit abnormal and rapid growth. Early in the course of the disease there are usually no symptoms (asymptomatic). As the disease progresses, symptoms like indigestion, nausea, vomiting, and feeling full earlier than normal (early satiety) may develop. The cause of stomach cancer is multifactorial, which means that multiple factors that occur together are necessary for the cancer to develop. These factors can include genetic, immunologic, infectious, and environmental factors. Stomach cancer usually develops randomly for unknown reasons (sporadically), and there is usually no family history.
There are several different forms of stomach cancer. The most common is called adenocarcinoma, which accounts for about 90-95% of people with stomach cancer. Other types include primary gastric lymphoma, gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), and neuroendocrine (carcinoid) tumors in the stomach. NORD has information on these forms of cancer – for more information choose the specific cancer name as your search term in the Rare Disease Database. In rare instances, other forms of cancer can arise in the stomach including squamous cell carcinoma, small cell carcinoma, and leiomyosarcoma. Malignancies in other organs rarely metastasize to the stomach, although breast cancer is one malignancy that can spread to the stomach in very rare circumstances. This report primarily deals with adenocarcinoma of the stomach or gastroesophageal junction.
The stomach is the organ where the main part of digestion occurs. The stomach is connected to the esophagus (a tube that is connected to the throat) at the gastroesophageal junction. After food is chewed and swallowed it travels down the throat, through the esophagus and into the stomach. The bottom part of the stomach is connected to the small intestine called the duodenum. Stomach cancer (adenocarcinoma) can occur anywhere in the stomach, but most often arises from the cells making up the mucus membrane lining the stomach (mucus-producing cells). When cancer forms near the esophagus, it may be referred to as cancer of the gastroesophageal junction.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms can vary greatly from one person to another. Specific findings depend on numerous factors including the exact location of the tumor, the extent of the tumor into nearby tissue or organs, the specific organs involved, and whether the disease has remained localized or spread to other areas of the body (metastasized). Stomach cancer is a slow-growing cancer that usually develops over a year or longer.
Generally, there are no symptoms in the early stages (asymptomatic). As the disease progresses, a variety of symptoms can develop. These symptoms include indigestion (dyspepsia), which can be severe and persistent, nausea, vomiting, feeling full after eating a small amount of food (early satiety), feeling bloated after eating, and severe, persistent heartburn. Sometimes, stomach discomfort or pain, difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), fatigue, and unintended weight loss can occur. Pain is mild and vague early in the disease, but becomes more severe and constant as the disease progresses.
Loss of blood from the stomach can occur and can go unnoticed leading to anemia (low levels of circulating red blood cells). Anemia can lead to fatigue, paleness of skin, and shortness of breath. Although uncommon, in advanced cases, affected individuals may vomit blood (hematemesis) or have dark, sticky feces (melena) due to blood in the stools.
Sometimes, the first signs or symptoms of stomach cancer occur after the cancer has spread to other areas of the body. Exact symptoms will depend upon where the cancer spreads to, but common symptoms include inability to tolerate any oral intake due to bowel obstruction, fractures, neurologic changes, and swelling of the abdomen due to the buildup of fluid (ascites).
Some other signs of advanced disease include a mass in the upper, center region of the abdomen (epigastric mass) or enlargement of the liver (hepatomegaly).

