Sturge Weber Syndrome

synonyms:
Dimitri diseaseencephalofacial angiomatosisencephalotrigeminal angiomatosisleptomeningeal angiomatosisSturge-Kalischer-Weber syndromeSturge-Weber-Krabbe syndromeSturge-Weber phakomatosisSWS

overview:
Summary
Sturge-Weber syndrome (SWS) is a rare vascular disorder characterized by the association of a facial birthmark called a port-wine birthmark, abnormal blood vessels in the brain, and eye abnormalities such as glaucoma. SWS can be thought of as a spectrum of disease in which individuals may have abnormalities affecting all three of these systems (i.e. brain, skin and eyes), or only two, or only one. Consequently, the specific symptoms and severity of the disorder can vary dramatically from one person to another. Symptoms are usually present at birth (congenital), yet the disorder is not inherited and does not run in families. Some symptoms may not develop until adulthood. SWS is caused by a somatic mutation, most commonly in theGNAQgene. This mutation occurs randomly (sporadically) for no known reason.
Introduction
SWS may be classified as a neurocutaneous syndrome or one of the phakomatoses. Neurocutaneous syndromes or phakomatoses are broad terms for groups of disorders in which “growths” develop in the skin, brain, spinal cord, bones and sometimes other organs of the body. In the case of SWS, these “growths” are malformations of abnormal blood vessels.
Some publications break down SWS into three main subtypes. Type 1 consists of skin and neurological symptoms. These individuals may or may not have glaucoma. Type 2 consists of skin symptoms and possibly glaucoma, but there is no evidence of neurological involvement. Type 3 consists of neurological involvement, but without skin abnormalities. Glaucoma is usually not present. Type 3 may also be known as the isolated neurological variant.

symptoms:
SWS is a highly variable disorder. Some individuals may develop characteristic skin abnormalities, but no neurological abnormalities. Less often, individuals develop neurological abnormalities without the characteristic skin issues. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all of the symptoms discussed below and that every individual patient is unique. Parents should talk to their child’s physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
A congenital facial birthmark known as a capillary malformation (port-wine birthmark or nevus flammeus) is often the most notable initial symptom. This birthmark can range from light pink to reddish to dark purple in color. The size of a port-wine birthmark can vary. Usually, at least one eyelid, temple area, and/or the forehead of one side of the face are affected; both sides of the face have been affected less often. In some children, the entire half of one, or both, side of the face may be affected. Sometimes, the discoloration may extend slightly onto the other side of the face or both sides of the face may be extensively involved. Rarely, a port-wine birthmark extends all the way to the trunk and/or arms. The port-wine birthmark that characterizes SWS is caused by an overabundance of capillaries just below the surface of the skin. Capillaries are tiny blood vessels that form a fine network throughout the body connecting arteries and veins and are responsible for the exchange of various substances such as oxygen between cells and tissue. If untreated, port-wine birthmarks may deepen in color with age, thicken, and potentially develop blood blisters (blebs) that can burst causing spontaneously bleeding.
The abnormal blood vessels that make up a port-wine birthmark will vary in size, diameter, distribution, and depth from one individual to another and even within the same person in different affected areas. This means that a port-wine birthmark in each individual is unique and can be quite dissimilar from one person to another.
Individuals with SWS may also experience a variety of neurological abnormalities. The extent of neurological involvement can vary dramatically from one person to another. Neurological symptoms are caused by the abnormal malformation of blood vessels on the surface of the brain (leptomeningeal angiomas). Seizures, which often begin in infancy or childhood, are a common finding. Seizures usually affect the opposite side of the body as the brain involvement (and the port-wine birthmark), but sometimes affect both sides of the body. Seizures may vary in frequency and intensity and sometimes may worsen in severity and frequency with age. Affected individuals may also experience muscle weakness or paralysis on one side of the body (hemiparesis), usually on the side opposite the brain involvement and the port-wine birthmark.
Developmental delays and intellectual disability ranging from mild learning disabilities to severe cognitive deficits may occur in pediatric patients and may lead to lower cognitive function and quality of life; in other children, intelligence and cognition are unaffected. In patients with severe or uncontrolled seizures, cognitive impairments are common. Younger age at seizure onset is associated with lower cognitive function and quality of life. In addition, greater extensive skin involvement, bilateral glaucoma, and greater total Sturge-Weber involvements are associated with lower quality of life.
Physical and family histories are associated with neurological and cognitive development in SWS patients as well. Patients with bilateral brain involvement are more likely to have learning disabilities and intellectual disability, while the extent of the port-wine birthmark is associated with epilepsy. Family history of birthmarks is associated with symptomatic strokes, and family history of seizures is associated with earlier seizure onset. Earlier seizure onset is associated with learning disabilities, intellectual disability, stroke-like episodes, symptomatic strokes, hemiparesis, visual field deficit, and brain surgery.
Headaches, including migraines, and visual field defects such as the loss of vision in half the visual field in one or both eyes (hemaniopsia) may also occur. There is a risk of stroke, stroke-like episodes or mini-strokes (transient ischemic attacks). Stroke-like episodes can be associated with temporary (transient) weakness or paralysis of half of the body and visual field defects. Behavioral problems such as attention deficit disorder, mood disorders, and poorer social skills have also been seen in some children, particularly those with lower cognitive function and a greater frequency of seizures.
Some children are born with, or develop, glaucoma, a condition marked by increased pressure within the eye. Glaucoma usually affects the eye on the same side of the face as the port-wine birthmark. Glaucoma can potentially damage the optic nerve, the main nerve that transmits signals from the eye to the brain, ultimately resulting in progressive vision loss. The same eye also may become enlarged and appear to bulge out or to enlarge its socket (buphthalmos).
Other eye abnormalities can occur including the development of angiomas in the membranes that line the inner surface of the eyelids (conjunctiva), the layer of blood vessels and connective tissue (choroid) between the white of the eye and the retina, and the clear, transparent membrane covering the membrane (cornea). An affected individual’s eyes can be two different colors (e.g. one brown and one blue eye). Additional ocular symptoms can include an abnormal accumulation of fluid inside the eyeball causing enlargement of the eyeball (hydrophthalmos), degeneration of the cranial nerve that transmit lights signals to the brain (optic atrophy), clouding or displacement of the lenses, retinal detachment, streaks resembling blood vessels in the retina (angioid streaks), and/or loss of vision due to an organic lesion in the visual cortex (cortical blindness). Individuals who have neurological abnormalities, but do not have a port-wine birthmark generally do not develop eye problems, but can have cortical blindness presenting as visual field deficits.
Endocrine disorders have also been reported in some individuals including central hypothyroidism and an increased risk of growth hormone deficiency. Central hypothyroidism is characterized by underactivity of the thyroid gland due to insufficient stimulation of thyroid stimulating hormone in an otherwise healthy thyroid. Central hypothyroidism in SWS may be due to anti-seizure medication.
Additional symptoms may occur including an abnormally large head (macrocephaly), overgrowth (hypertrophy) of the certain soft tissues underlying the port-wine birthmark, and lymphatic malformations, which are non-malignant masses consisting of fluid-filled channels or spaces thought to be caused by abnormal development of the lymphatic system. These symptoms are consistent with a related rare disorder known as Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome (KTS) and most children with these findings are classified as having KTS. Patients with these issues or presenting with other atypical features should have genetic testing as several somatic mutations have been associated with SWS and KTS including gene mutations inGNAQ,GNAQ11,PIK3CAand others.

