Stuve-Wiedemann Syndrome

synonyms:
STWSSchwartz-Jampel syndrome type 2SJS2Schwartz-Jampel syndrome neonatalStuve-Wiedemann/Schwartz-Jampel type 2 syndromeNeonatal Schwartz-Jampel syndrome type 2

overview:
Summary
Stuve Wiedemann syndrome (STWS) is a rare genetic disorder that has been diagnosed in very few patients. It is characterized by short stature, bowing of the long bones of the arms and legs (campomelia) and fingers or toes that are permanently flexed (camptodactyly) outward away from the thumb (ulnar deviation). Affected infants are often unable to survive past one year due to life-threatening complications, including respiratory distress and episodes during which there is a sudden rise in body temperature (hyperthermia). Those who do survive will develop severe spinal deformities, spontaneous bone fractures, temperature instability (from dysautonomia) and some general developmental delays, though no intellectual deficits have been found. STWS is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
In the past, STWS was thought to be a lethal condition in all affected individuals. Today, survival past the first year of life is increasingly common thanks to early diagnosis and proper medical monitoring.

symptoms:
The symptoms of STWS vary from person to person. Most infants develop characteristic skeletal abnormalities including permanent flexion of fingers or toes (camptodactyly) outward away from the thumb (ulnar deviation) and bowing of the long bones of the arms and legs (camptomelia), which results in short stature. Affected infants may also have underdeveloped muscle tone (hypotonia) and/or an elbow that is permanently fixed in a bent or flexed position (elbow contracture). Some children with STWS have distinctive facial features, including a small chin (micrognathia), pursed mouth, and underdeveloped upper jaw, cheekbones, and eye sockets (midface hypoplasia) that sometimes results in protruding eyes.
Some infants with STWS may develop episodes where they repeatedly stop breathing during sleep (sleep apnea). Feeding and swallowing difficulties may also occur. In some children, life-threatening complications may develop early during infancy including respiratory distress and repeated episodes where there is a sudden rise in body temperature (hyperthermia).
Other symptoms include decreased bone density (osteopenia) and autonomic nervous system dysfunction (dysautonomia) that includes difficulty regulating temperature, smooth tongue and absent corneal (blinking) and patellar reflexes. The absence of a corneal reflex may put children at risk of physical damage to the eye resulting in vision loss. Affected children will also have general developmental delays, though there have been no reports of any intellectual deficits.
The specific clinical picture of STWS is unclear due to the small number of cases reported in the medical literature. Some affected individuals develop symptoms similar to those associated with dysautonomia. (For more information on dysautonomia, see the Related Disorders section below). These symptoms may include diminished sensitivity to pain, absence of the knob-like projections that cover the tongue (fungiform papillae), excessive sweating at low temperatures, absent corneal reflexes, multiple fractures and spinal abnormalities.
Additional findings have been reported in some children with STWS including high blood pressure of the main artery of the lungs (pulmonary hypertension), liver (hepatic) failure, and a form of clubfoot in which the heel is turned outward away from the midline of the leg (talipes valgus). It is not known whether these are characteristic findings of STWS or coincidental findings. As STWS becomes better recognized, more cases will be identified allowing for a clearer clinical picture to emerge.

