STXBP1 Disorders

synonyms:
STXBP1encephalopathySTXBP1epileptic encephalopathySTXBP1-related disordersdevelopmental and epileptic encephalopathy 4 [MIM: 612164]

overview:
Summary
STXBP1-related disorders comprise a spectrum of rare autosomal dominant neurodevelopmental conditions caused by changes in theSTXBP1gene.STXBP1-related epileptic encephalopathy was initially discovered in 2008 in individuals with a severe, neonatal epilepsy termed Ohtahara syndrome (Saitsu et al, 2008). In the years following, the spectrum of patient presentations expanded significantly. Individuals withSTXBP1-related disorders experience a broad range of symptoms including early-onset seizures, developmental delays, intellectual disability, muscular hypotonia, spasticity and ataxia. Affected individuals may also exhibit some features of autism spectrum disorder. Individuals with STXBP1-related disorders may be also described as having a developmental and epileptic encephalopathy since most experience both developmental delay and epilepsy.
TheSTXBP1gene encodes the syntaxin-binding protein 1, which is integral to communication between nerve cells, facilitating the release of neurotransmitter into the synapse. Individuals with a pathogenic variant in theSTXBP1gene do not produce enough syntaxin-binding protein 1. The estimated incidence rate forSTXBP1-related disorders is approximately 1 in 30,000 (Lopez-Rivera et al, 2020).
Seizures typically develop in the first year of life and may be the first symptom to bring children to medical attention. Epilepsy onset may occur after infancy, generally in early childhood, though onset has been reported in adolescence (Stamberger et al, 2016, Ambramov et al, 2020). Individuals are typically treated with anti-seizure medications (ASMs) to control seizures; however, seizures are not controlled in 25% of patients treated with ASMs. Other treatment options include ketogenic diet, steroids and adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH) for infantile spasms and epilepsy surgery including vagal nerve stimulation.

symptoms:
Children withSTXBP1-related disorders typically present with seizures and/or delays in meeting early developmental milestones. Epilepsy is diagnosed in up to 85% of individuals withSTXBP1-related disorders, often developing very early in life; the median age of seizure onset is as early as six weeks, though onset may range from the immediate postnatal period to adolescence (Abramov et al, 2020, Stamberger et al, 2016). A broad spectrum of seizure types has been reported, including infantile or epileptic spasms, focal-onset seizures, and tonic seizures; up to 40% of children withSTXBPI-related disorders develop infantile spasms. Epilepsy in children withSTXBP1-related disorders is unpredictable and may prove difficult to treat, especially early in the course, often requiring concurrent use of multiple ASMs. More than a third of children withSTXBP1-related disorders achieve seizure freedom during childhood.
In some children, delays in achieving early developmental milestones may be the first sign of aSTXBP1-related disorder. This may manifest as a failure to achieve head control, roll over or crawl within the expected timeframe. Low muscle tone (hypotonia) may be an early indication of delayed motor development in children with this disorder; in a subset of children, hypotonia may be the first indication of spasticity. All children with aSTXBP1-related disorder have some degree of neurodevelopmental delays and/or intellectual disability (Stamberger et al, 2016). Independent walking is achieved in less than half of children withSTXBP1-related disorders, often several years after typically expected. The development of expressive language skills (e.g., ability to speak more than 2-3 words) is observed in only a small minority of children diagnosed withSTXBP1-related disorders (more than 90% of children will not acquire expressive language); however, children may have relatively spared receptive language and develop other means of communication. Features of autism spectrum disorder have been reported as well (reports ranging from 16-31%; Stamberger et al, 2016).
A variety of movement disorders and muscle tone abnormalities are also associated withSTXBP1-related disorders, including hypotonia; spasticity (i.e., stiff muscle tone); dystonia (i.e., repetitive muscle contractures causing twisting movements); ataxia (e.g., motor incoordination, unsteady gait); tremor and dyskinesias (involuntary, erratic movements). These signs may emerge or evolve in terms of severity at any point during infancy or childhood. However, new-onset neurological symptoms beyond the first three years of life are not common. Cortical visual impairment is seen in some children withSTXBP1-related disorders.

