Subacute Cerebellar Degeneration

overview:
Summary
Subacute cerebellar degeneration (SCD) is characterized by the deterioration of the area of the brain concerned with muscle coordination and balance (the cerebellum). Less frequently, the area involved may include the region connecting the spinal cord to the brain (the medulla oblongata, the cerebral cortex, and the brain stem). There are two types of SCD: 1) paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration, which sometimes precedes the diagnosis of cancer, and 2) alcoholic or nutritional cerebellar degeneration, caused by a lack of the vitamin B-1 (thiamine). These two types share symptoms but not the same cause. Hallmark symptoms include weakened muscle coordination (ataxia), difficulty speaking (dysarthria), difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), abnormal walking patterns and dementia.
Paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration may be an autoimmune disorder (diseases where the immune system mistakenly attacks one own body) that affects more females than males and has an average age of onset of 50 years old. It has been associated with certain cancers and production of certain autoimmune antibodies, proteins released by immune cells that mistakenly recognizes and attack proteins in one’s own body instead of foreign substances like bacteria and viruses. Cancers associated with paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration are Hodgkin’s disease, small-cell lung cancer (SCLC), breast, and gynecologic cancers. The cancers may trigger production of autoimmune antibodies that attack brain cells in the cerebellum called Purkinje cells, leading to cerebellar degeneration. In alcoholic cerebellar degeneration, symptoms usually begin to occur in middle-aged individuals with a history of chronic alcohol abuse. These symptoms are caused by thiamine deficiency, which also occurs in nutritional cerebellar degeneration.
If SCD is suspected, magnetic resonance spectroscopy, cerebrospinal fluid analyses, paraneoplastic antibody assays, and imaging studies such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans and computed tomography (CT) scans, may be performed for a definitive diagnosis. If diagnosed with paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration, available therapies include treatment of the underlying cancer and associated antibodies. If diagnosed with alcoholic or nutritional cerebellar degeneration, treatment includes receiving thiamine, along with either decreasing alcohol consumption or resuming a normal diet.

symptoms:
Common symptoms of SCD include:
1) Weakened muscle coordination (ataxia) of the limbs (especially of the arms in paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration, and of the legs in alcoholic or nutritional cerebellar degeneration);(2) Problems in articulation of speech (dysarthria), which are especially noticeable in paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration;(3) Difficulty in swallowing (dysphagia);(4) Loss of reason (dementia); this occurs in approximately half the patients with paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration;(5) Involuntary rapid movements of the eyeball in a horizontal or vertical direction (nystagmus); as well as double-vision (diplopia), vertigo (dizziness), and paralysis of the eye muscles (ophthalmoplegia) if the patient has alcoholic/nutritional cerebellar degeneration;(6) Cell loss localized to the midline structures of the cerebellum contributes to poor motor coordination of the head, such as head bobbing and loss of limb movements(7) Tremors (shaking) related to complex motor tasks or purposeful movements due to abnormal Purkinje cells (a particular kind of nerve cell) throughout the cerebellum;(8) Repetitive behaviors in children (hand clapping, rhythmic rocking, twirling of objects) associated with cerebellar vermis damage;(9) Problems with cognitive and emotional regulation (autism, schizophrenia, attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder)
In addition, patients with SCD lose many Purkinje cells throughout the cerebellum. Computerized axial tomography (CAT) scans may show enlargement of the area of the brain between the spinal cord and the rest of the brain (fourth ventricle) as well as areas of the cerebellum. Examination of cerebrospinal fluid may show a high volume of lymph cells (white blood cells formed in lymphoid tissue) and an elevated protein level.

