Succinic Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase Deficiency

synonyms:
4-hydroxybutyric aciduriaSSADH deficiency

overview:
Summary
Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH) deficiency is a rare inborn error of metabolism that is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. In individuals with the disorder, deficient activity of the SSADH enzyme disrupts the metabolism of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). GABA is a natural chemical known as a “neurotransmitter” that serves to inhibit the electrical activities of nerve cells (inhibitory neurotransmitter). SSADH deficiency leads to abnormal accumulation of the compound succinic semialdehyde, which is reduced or converted to 4-hydroxybutyric acid, also known as GHB (gamma-hydroxybutyric acid). GHB is a natural compound that has a wide range of effects within the nervous system. The “hallmark” laboratory finding associated with SSADH deficiency is elevated levels of GHB in the urine (i.e., 4-hydroxybutyric or gamma-hydroxybutyric aciduria), the liquid portion of the blood (plasma), and the fluid that flows through the brain and spinal canal (cerebrospinal fluid [CSF]).
SSADH deficiency leads to various neurological and neuromuscular symptoms and findings. These abnormalities may be extremely variable from person to person, including among affected members of the same families (kindreds). However, most individuals with SSADH deficiency are affected by mild to severe intellectual disability, delays in the acquisition of skills requiring the coordination of mental and physical activities (psychomotor retardation), and delays in language and speech development. In addition, in some people, initial findings may include diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), an impaired ability to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia), and/or episodes of uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain (seizures). Some affected individuals may also have additional abnormalities, such as decreased reflex reactions (hyporeflexia); involuntary, rapid, rhythmic eye movements (nystagmus); increased muscular activity (hyperkinesis); and/or behavioral abnormalities.

symptoms:
In individuals with SSADH deficiency, the range, severity, and presentation of certain symptoms and findings may be variable, including among affected family members. In addition, such neurological and neuromuscular symptoms are often considered “nonspecific”, meaning that they may be associated with any number of underlying disorders, potentially leading to difficulties with diagnosis. (For further information, please see the “Standard Therapies: Diagnosis” section of this report below.) However, during childhood, most affected individuals appear to have some degree of delays in the development of certain physical, mental, and behavioral skills that are typically acquired at particular stages (i.e., “developmental milestones”).
Initial or “presenting” symptoms vary from person to person. However, initial symptoms often include delays in achieving certain motor milestones (e.g., crawling, sitting unaided, walking without assistance); reduced muscle tone (hypotonia); and/or intellectual or language delays. In some people, additional presenting symptoms are an impaired ability to coordinate voluntary movements (ataxia); episodes of uncontrolled electrical activity in the brain (seizures); and/or certain abnormalities during early infancy including failure to cry or respond to certain visual stimuli. Although symptoms usually begin during infancy or childhood, the disorder sometimes is not diagnosed until adulthood.
The language and speech abnormalities associated with SSADH deficiency may be extremely variable. For example, in severe cases, individuals may be nonverbal or speech may be infrequent and consist of only a few words or simple phrases but some people have normal speech and language development.
As mentioned above, ataxia or incoordination is sometimes an initial finding associated with SSADH deficiency. The ataxia is typically non-progressive, may be confined to muscles of the trunk and the arms or legs (limbs), and tends to resolve with age.
Some individuals with SSADH deficiency may also develop additional neurological and neuromuscular symptoms. Such abnormalities may include decreased or absent reflex reactions (hyporeflexia or areflexia); abnormally increased muscular activity (hyperkinesis); and/or, less commonly, a movement disorder known as choreoathetosis. This condition is characterized by involuntary, rapid, jerky movements (chorea) occurring in association with relatively slow, sinuous, writhing motions (athetosis). Some affected individuals may also develop behavioral abnormalities, such as unusual irritability, easy agitation or frustration, increasingly aggressive behavior, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) or “autistic-like” behaviors. The latter may include impaired communication and social interaction, extreme withdrawal, and/or a tendency to engage in certain ritualistic behaviors or repeated body movements (e.g., frequent rocking).
Additional abnormalities have been reported in association with SSADH deficiency. For example, some individuals may be affected by unusual drowsiness (somnolence); psychotic behaviors, such as the perception of certain sounds, sights, or other sensations in the absence of external stimuli (hallucinations); and/or certain eye (locular) abnormalities. Ocular findings may include involuntary, rapid, rhythmic eye movements (nystagmus); and impaired ability to consciously coordinate movements of the eyes (oculomotor apraxia); and/or poor vision. Some affected individuals have been reported to have abnormalities of the skull and facial (craniofacial) area, including unusual smallness or largeness of the head (microcephaly or macrocephaly).
As mentioned above, non-progressive ataxia associated with SSADH deficiency may tend to significantly improve with age. In addition, evidence suggests that there may be additional variations with age seen in associated symptoms. For example, whereas some younger individuals may tend to be affected by drowsiness (somnolence), older individuals may be more likely to develop abnormally increased activity (hyperactivity) or aggressive behaviors.

