Superior Mesenteric Artery Syndrome

synonyms:
aortomesenteric artery compressioncast syndromeduodenal vascular compressionmesenteric root syndromeSMASSMA syndromeWilkie’s syndromeaortomesenteric artery duodenal compression

overview:
Summary

Superior mesenteric artery (SMA) syndrome is a rare condition that involves compression of the third portion of the duodenum which is the upper part of the small intestines just past the stomach. This condition occurs when the third part of the duodenum is compressed between two arteries – the main artery of the body called the abdominal aorta (AA) and one of its branches called the SMA. The SMA provides blood supply to the small intestines and the first part of the colon. Compression of the SMA against the AA can prevent duodenal contents from draining into the jejunum (upper small intestine) hence the inability to get proper nutrition leading to weight loss and malnutrition. Pain from the compression can be debilitating, causing “food fear” and aggravating the condition. Nausea and vomiting are manifestations of the compression of the duodenum. When weight loss is persistent, the mesenteric fat pad decreases and causes a decrease in the angle between the SMA and AA hence aggravating the compression and obstruction. Prompt diagnosis and early treatment are essential to avoid significant complications or death.

Introduction

SMA syndrome is considered extremely uncommon and most consider this as a diagnosis of exclusion i.e., many other more common diagnoses must be ruled out.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms can vary greatly from one person to another. Sometimes the symptoms are mild and build slowly over time. Without treatment, in some people, symptoms can be severely disabling. Generally, the initial symptoms are nonspecific, which means that symptoms are common ones that can be associated with many different conditions. Sometimes symptoms can come and go (intermittent).
Symptoms can include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, indigestion (dyspepsia) and early satiety, in which the person feels full despite having very little food or drink because the stomach is not emptying. The stomach remains full of fluid or food previously ingested hours before. Constipation can occur when there is delay in stomach emptying. Vomiting of undigested food can occur and can become bilious i.e., green or yellow when the blockage becomes severe. Relief can be obtained by lying on the right decubitus or left decubitus (right or left side down) or face down (prone) with both arms and legs up (knee to chest position) after eating or drinking to allow the stomach to empty better. The abdominal pain can be severe after intake of food or drink because the pulsation of the SMA becomes stronger and bounding against the duodenum. Food aversion or food fear follows which aggravates the weight loss and worsens SMA syndrome.
Some affected individuals may also have nutcracker syndrome in which the left renal vein (kidney vein) is compressed by the AA and SMA. Most people affected have no symptoms but those affected will have left flank and pelvic pain and may have blood in the urine (hematuria).

