Superficial Siderosis

synonyms:
superficial siderosis of the central nervous systemsubpial siderosiscerebellar siderosissuperficial hemosiderosishemosiderosis of the central nervous system

overview:
Summary
Superficial siderosis is a disabling degenerative disorder affecting the brain and spinal cord. Persistent or recurring long-term bleeding (hemorrhage) into the subarachnoid space in the brain results in a toxic build-up of hemosiderin (an important component of iron delivery) on the surface of the brain and pia mater from circulating cerebrospinal fluid. Patients have one or more of the classic three symptoms: hearing loss, movement abnormalities (ataxia) and motor difficulties due to suspected spinal cord injury (myelopathy) with pyramidal signs. Proper recognition and timely early diagnosis of superficial siderosis allow for early care planning.

symptoms:
Typically, the period between the onset of noticeable clinical symptoms and the trigger event ranges between 10-30 years. Symptoms and signs will present depending on the location of hemosiderin deposition and state of weakness of neural tissue. The intensity of deposition shown on imaging will not always correspond with the degree of disability due to the slow-moving progressive nature of the disorder. About 95% of patients have progressive hearing impairment in both ears and about 88% of patients show signs of progressive ataxia with a focus on wide-based gait and balance issues. About 76% have myelopathy with pyramidal signs. Additional signs include mild cognitive impairment, uncontrolled eye movements (nystagmus), poor coordination (dysmetria), difficulty swallowing (dysphagia), uncontrolled muscle movements (spasticity), loss of smell (anosmia), loss of taste (ageusia), different pupil sizes in the eyes (anisocoria), bladder or bowel dysfunction, sensory defects, small motor dysfunction, nerve pain (neuropathy), headache, autonomic nervous system dysfunction, inability to perform rapid, coordinated movements (dysdiadochokinesia), slurred speech (dysarthria), overactive reflexes (hyperreflexia) and abnormal foot reflexes (Babinski signs)
Cortical superficial siderosis (cSS) is a recognized type of superficial siderosis. Hemosiderin deposition is limited to cortical sulci over the convexities of the cerebral hemispheres, sparing the cerebellum, brainstem and spinal cord affected in the classic iSS symptoms. Identified with gradient recalled echo (GRE) or susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) MRI as linear hypointensities, cortical superficial siderosis (cSS) is often due to cerebral amyloid angiopathy, an age-related cerebral small vessel disorder. Symptoms of amyloid angiopathy include transient focal neurological episodes, cognitive impairment, generalized seizures, headaches and increased intracerebral hemorrhage risk.

