Susac Syndrome

overview:
Summary
Susac syndrome is a relatively rare disorder characterized by three main problems: impaired brain function (encephalopathy), partial or complete blockage (occlusion) of the small arteries and capillaries that supply blood to the retina (branch retinal artery occlusion, or BRAO) and inner ear disease (hearing loss, most notably). MRI of the brain typically reveals “snowball” lesions in the corpus callosum. Three main forms of Susac syndrome have become apparent. In one form, encephalopathy is the main problem. In the second form, BRAO and hearing loss are the main problems and there is little or no brain disease. In the third form, encephalopathy is the main problem in the beginning, but recurrent episodes of BRAO become the main problem after the encephalopathy subsides. The encephalopathic form of Susac syndrome often resolves within 1-3 years. The other forms tend to follow a more prolonged, more chronic or more recurrent course (for 3-10 years or more). All forms require immunosuppressive treatment while the disease is active.
Introduction
Although considered rare, Susac syndrome is being recognized more often worldwide and its true frequency in the general population is unknown. This is because the disorder may be misdiagnosed, often as “atypical” multiple sclerosis.
Susac syndrome is an autoimmune disease—specifically, an autoimmune endotheliopathy. “Autoimmune” means that a person’s own immune system is mistakenly attacking its own tissue. An “endotheliopathy” is any disorder that involves injury to the endothelium, which is the thin layer of cells that line the inner walls of blood vessels. In Susac syndrome, the person’s own immune system is mistakenly attacking the endothelial lining of the smallest blood vessels (the capillaries, venules and arterioles) in the brain, retina and inner ear. When the endothelial cells become injured, they tend to swell, and this endothelial cell swelling plays a key role in the partial or complete occlusion (blockage) of the tiny vessels in the brain, retina and inner ear. This blockage results in decreased blood flow through the vessels and, therefore, decreased delivery of oxygen and nutrients to the brain, retina and inner ear—causing either temporary dysfunction or permanent damage to these three organs, depending on the severity and duration of the decreased blood flow.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms, severity, and outcome of Susac syndrome vary from one person to another. Commonly, the three main features (encephalopathy, branch retinal arterial occlusions and hearing loss) are not all present at disease onset, and all three do not necessarily develop in all patients. When patients are first evaluated by a physician, any one of the three main features may be the only feature present, with one or both of the other features appearing only later. The skin may also be involved, and the symptoms may include livedo reticularis and a diffuse micropapular rash.
In many patients, headaches (including migraine-like headaches) precede the development of other symptoms of Susac syndrome. A variety of additional neurological findings may develop: cognitive dysfunction (including memory loss, confusion and decreased executive function), gait disturbance and slurred speech (dysarthria). Some individuals develop psychiatric symptoms such as paranoia or personality or behavioral changes. The specific neurological symptoms that develop will vary from one person to another.
Branch retinal artery occlusion (BRAO) can cause the patient to notice a “dark spot” or “black area” in their field of vision; or some patients describe a “curtain or shade being drawn” over a portion of their vision. The medical term for these symptoms is “scotoma.” These symptoms are due to injury to the retina, because of blocked blood flow. The retina is the thin layer of nerve cells that sense light and convert it to nerve signals, which are then relayed to the brain through the optic nerve. Both eyes can be affected in individuals with Susac syndrome. Permanent impairment of vision may occur. BRAOs may occur early in some individuals or later in the course of the disease in others.
Many individuals with Susac syndrome develop hearing loss due to damage to the small, snail-shaped organ of the inner ear known as the cochlea. The cochlea converts sound into nerve impulses to be sent to the brain. The damage to the cochlea is caused by the blockage of blood flow through the small vessels that supply blood to the cochlea. Hearing loss in Susac syndrome is primarily at low frequencies and usually occurs relatively suddenly. It may affect both ears (bilateral). Its severity can range from mild to severe. In severe cases, cochlear implantation is warranted. In some cases, hearing loss may occur before other symptoms of Susac syndrome develop. Hearing loss is often accompanied by intense ringing of the ears (tinnitus). The vestibular apparatus, which is also located in the inner ear, can also be affected by the microvascular endotheliopathy of Susac syndrome, resulting in vertigo (dizziness).
The encephalopathic form of Susac syndrome is typically self-limited (i.e., eventually subsides on its own), but may take a long time to resolve and may recur. It usually runs a course of 1-3 years, during which time individuals may experience fluctuating levels of symptoms (relapsing-remitting). Although the encephalopathic form eventually goes away on its own, treatment is necessary to prevent or minimize damage that can occur while the disease is active. Relapse after a long period of remission is rare but can occur.

