Sweet Syndrome

synonyms:
Acute Febrile Neutrophilic Dermatosis

overview:
Sweet syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by fever and the sudden onset of a rash, which consists of multiple tender, red or bluish-red bumps or lesions. These lesions usually occur on the arms, legs, trunk, face or neck. In some cases, additional systems of the body can become involved including the musculoskeletal system such as inflammation of the joints (arthritis), the eyes such as inflammation of the conjunctiva or the membrane that lines the eyes (conjunctivitis), and the internal organs. In the majority of affected individuals, the disorder occurs by itself for no known reason (idiopathic Sweet syndrome); this is also known as classical Sweet syndrome. Less often, the disorder can be associated with an underlying cancer (malignancy), usually a blood (hematologic) cancer such as certain types of leukemia; this is known as malignancy-associated Sweet syndrome. The disorder can also result as a reaction to taking certain drugs, especially a drug known as granulocyte-colony stimulating factor; this is known as drug-induced Sweet syndrome. Sweet syndrome is treated with corticosteroids.
Introduction
Sweet syndrome was first described in the medical literature in 1964 by Dr. Robert Douglas Sweet. The disorder is classified as a neutrophilic dermatosis, which is a general term for a group of skin disorders characterized by the accumulation of neutrophils in the skin. Neutrophils are a specific type of white blood cell that is instrumental in fighting off infection by surrounding and destroying bacteria that enter the body. In Sweet syndrome neutrophils accumulate in the dermis, the thick layer of tissue just below the outer layer of the skin (epidermis).

symptoms:
The major symptom of Sweet syndrome is the sudden onset of tender or painful bumps (nodules or papules) on the arms, legs, face or neck. They may also occur on the thighs and trunk. Papules are solid, raises lesions; nodules are slightly larger and may extend deeper into the skin. These initial lesions are usually several millimeters to centimeters in diameter, but sometimes up to an inch in diameter, flat or slightly elevated, irregularly-shaped, and inflamed. They tend to grow slowly, eventually joining together (coalescing) to form larger, irregular plaques. Small pus-filled blisters (pustules) may develop.
In some individuals, neutrophils may accumulated in the fatty layer of tissue just below the skin (subcutaneous fat) rather than in the dermis. Affected individuals often develop reddish (erythematous) discoloration of the skin and small bumps (nodules) on the skin. The arms and legs are most often affected.
Individuals with Sweet syndrome also experience fever, fatigue, headaches, a general feeling of ill health (malaise), muscle pain (myalgia), and inflammation and pain of the joints (arthritis and arthralgia). Fever can precede the development of skin symptoms by days or weeks.
Sweet syndrome can potentially affect most organ systems of the body. The most common organ system involved outside of the skin is the eyes. Affected individuals can develop inflammation of the conjunctiva, the delicate membrane that lines the eyes (conjunctivitis) or inflammation of the thin layer of tissue (episclera) covering the whites of the eyes (episcleritis). Less often, additional symptoms can occur including the formation of bumps on the limbus, which is the border of the cornea and the whites of the eyes (limbal nodules), glaucoma, inflammation of the iris, which is the colored portion of the eye (iritis), and inflammation and ulceration of the cornea (peripheral ulcerative keratitis).
In most individuals, Sweet syndrome occurs without any underlying disorder. In these individuals with classic Sweet syndrome, onset of the disorder usually follows an infection of the upper respiratory tract or gastrointestinal system.
Less often, Sweet syndrome is associated with a malignancy, most often a malignancy that affects the blood (hematologic malignancies), such as certain types of leukemia and, rarely, cancers of the genitourinary and gastrointestinal tracts. In some cases, individuals with malignancy-associated Sweet syndrome may have lesions affecting the mucous membranes of the mouth (oral mucosa).
Drug-induced Sweet syndrome has skin (cutaneous) symptoms are similar to those seen in the classical form.

