Swyer syndrome

synonyms:
46, XY CGD46, XY complete gonadal dysgenesis46, XY pure gonadal dysgenesisgonadal dysgenesis, XY female type

overview:
Summary
Swyer syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by the failure of the sex glands (i.e., testicles or ovaries) to develop. Swyer syndrome is classified as a disorder of sex development (DSD), which encompasses any disorder in which chromosomal, gonadal or anatomic sex development is abnormal. Girls with Swyer syndrome have an XY chromosomal makeup (as boys normally do) instead of an XX chromosomal makeup (as girls normally do). Despite having the XY chromosomal makeup, girls with Swyer syndrome look female and have functional female genitalia and structures including a vagina, uterus and fallopian tubes.
Girls with Swyer syndrome lack sex glands (ovaries). Instead of sex glands, women with Swyer syndrome have “gonadal streaks”, in which the ovaries do not develop properly (aplasia) and are replaced by functionless scar (fibrous) tissue. Because they lack ovaries, girls with Swyer syndrome do not produce sex hormones and will not undergo puberty (unless treated with hormone replacement therapy). Mutations in several different genes are known to cause Swyer syndrome. This condition can occur as the result of a new gene mutation or can be inherited in an autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, X-linked or Y-linked manner.
Intoduction
Swyer syndrome was first described in the medical literature by Dr. Swyer in 1955.

symptoms:
Most individuals with Swyer syndrome do not experience any outward symptoms until their early teens when they fail to begin having a period (primary amenorrhea). At this point, it is usually discovered that these girls lack ovaries and, therefore, do not have sex hormones (estrogen or progesterone) that are required to undergo puberty. When hormone replacement therapy is started, these girls will develop enlarged breasts, underarm and pubic hair, regular menstrual cycles and other aspects of normal development during puberty.
Women with Swyer syndrome may be tall and often have a small uterus and a slightly enlarged clitoris in comparison to most women. Because women with Swyer syndrome lack ovaries, they are infertile. However, they can become pregnant through the implantation of donated eggs.
A chief medical concern of women with Swyer syndrome is an increased risk of developing cancer of the underdeveloped gonadal tissue. Approximately 30 percent of women with Swyer syndrome develop a tumor that arises from the cells that forms the testes or ovaries (gonadal tumor). The most common gonadal tumor in women with Swyer syndrome is a gonadoblastoma, a benign (non-cancerous) tumor that occurs exclusively in people with defective development of the gonads. A gonadoblastoma usually does not become malignant or spread. Gonadoblastomas, however, may be precursors to the development of a malignant (cancerous) tumor such as a dysgerminoma, which has also been reported to occur with greater frequency in women with Swyer syndrome than in the general population.
Gonadal tumors can develop at any age including during childhood before a diagnosis of Swyer syndrome is even suspected.

