Sydenham Chorea

synonyms:
rheumatic choreaSt. Vitus dance

overview:
Summary
Sydenham chorea is a rare neurological disorder characterized by sudden onset chorea, usually in childhood. Chorea is defined as random-appearing, continuous (while awake), involuntary movements which can affect the entire body. This often includes the face and tongue. Symptoms in arms and legs are often worse on one side of the body. Additional symptoms of Sydenham chorea may include slurring of speech and difficulty maintaining steady hand grip. Anxiety, sadness, inattention, and obsessive compulsive thoughts and behaviors may also occur. Sydenham chorea most often affects children over the age of 5 years and adolescents. Sydenham chorea usually develops within weeks to months following group A beta-hemolytic streptococcal infection and may occur as an isolated finding or as a major complication of acute rheumatic fever. It is considered an autoimmune disorder, meaning it occurs when the body’s immune system (which normally responds to foreign substances) mistakenly targets part of the body, disrupting normal function.

symptoms:
The severity of chorea and the presence of non-chorea symptoms of Sydenham chorea may vary greatly from one person to another. Most cases follow an identifiable streptococcal infection. Streptococcus is a group of bacteria that can cause several different infections, most commonly “strep throat” – often presenting with a sore throat (pharyngitis) or fever. Symptoms of Sydenham chorea may appear anywhere from 1 week to 6 months following streptococcal infection.
The abnormal movements (chorea) that characterize Sydenham chorea usually emerge over hours, peaking within a few hours or days. Pediatricians and emergency physicians seldom see chorea and may not recognize it. Initially, doctors may misattribute the restless movements and involuntary facial expressions of Sydenham chorea to a child being extremely fidgety, hyperactive, clumsy and/or purposely uncooperative.  Parents (and children) generally recognize however that these movements, even in mild cases, are a clear change from the child’s usual status.The abnormal movements in Sydenham chorea range from subtle symptoms, affecting coordination and tasks such as writing, to severe symptoms, disrupting walking, talking, and performing basic tasks such as dressing, eating, or simply holding objects. Choreic movements may fluctuate through the day. In most cases, chorea disappears during sleep.
In addition to choreic movements, individuals with Sydenham chorea may develop muscle weakness, slurred speech (dysarthria), diminished muscle tone (hypotonia), tics, obsessions, compulsions, inattention, anxiety, labile mood, and decreased verbal output.  In some extremely rare cases (less than 2 percent), severe muscle weakness, irritability, or confusion may be profound and affected children may become bedridden, a condition sometimes referred to as paralytic chorea.
Because Sydenham chorea is a complication of rheumatic fever, some individuals will have additional symptoms of joint arthritis or arthralgia, inflammation of the heart valves causing permanent damage to the valves, and ongoing fever.
Sydenham chorea symptoms usually resolve within three weeks to six months. However, symptoms may last longer than one year. Occasionally, the symptoms of Sydenham chorea have recurred later during adult life, particularly in young women during the first trimester of pregnancy (so-called chorea gravidarum, which may represent a recurrence of Sydenham chorea in some cases).

