SYNCRIP-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder

synonyms:
SYNCRIP-RNDDHNRNPQ-RNDD

overview:
SYNCRIP-related neurodevelopmental disorder (SYNCRIP-RNDD) is a rare disorder characterized by developmental delay/intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, motor speech delay and low muscle tone (hypotonia). This condition is caused by changes (variants) in theSYNCRIPgene which is also known as theHNRNPQgene.

symptoms:
SYNCRIP-RNDD is characterized by developmental delay/intellectual disability, motor and speech delay, hypotonia and behavioral differences. Cognitive disabilities are typically in the mild to borderline intellectual disability range. Autism spectrum disorder is common. Some structural brain anomalies have been observed but are not consistent. Some affected individuals have had seizures and physical differences have been reported in some patients.
global developmental delay/intellectual disability: 92%
speech delay: 77%
autism spectrum disorder: 60%
facial differences: 50%
motor delay: 48%
hypotonia: 43%
vision anomalies: 42%
brain imaging anomalies: 40%
seizures: 33%
movement abnormalities: 32%
hand and feet abnormalities: 29%
genitourinary abnormalities: 24%
growth delay, primarily manifesting as short stature: 22%
Developmental delay/intellectual disabilityMost affected individuals that have been described in the medical literature with sufficient clinical information have been described to have borderline to mild developmental delay and/or intellectual disability. Almost 80% have delayed speech and language development, including individuals who are nonverbal or who have trouble speaking (verbal apraxia). For patients with available information, the average age of first words was approximately two years. Mild motor delay has been reported in almost half of individuals, with the average age of first steps being approximately 17 months.
Autism spectrum disorder and other behavioral differencesBehavioral differences are present in about 70% of individuals reported in the medical literature. The most prevalent of these is autism spectrum disorder or autistic features. A smaller group have attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or aggressive behaviors. Anxiety and sleep disturbances have also been reported.
Facial and physical featuresMost of the facial and physical differences reported are non-specific. About 15% of individuals have a large head (macrocephaly). Hand and feet anomalies, including 2-3 toe webbing (syndactyly), a gap between the great toe and second toe (sandal gap), elongated fingers and flat feet (pes planus) occur in almost 30% of individuals. While facial features vary, a fold of skin from the upper to lower eyelid (epicanthus), abnormalities of the space between the open eyelids (palpebral fissures), large and/or low-set ears and a thin upper lip are the most consistent. Heart (cardiac) issues have not been reported in individuals with SYNCRIP-RNDD.
HypotoniaGeneralized muscle weakness (hypotonia) is seen in 43% of individuals. Two individuals have been reported with spastic muscles.
Vision anomaliesVision anomalies observed include crossed eyes (strabismus) in 30% of individuals, nearsightedness (myopia) in three individuals, farsightedness (hyperopia or hypermetropia) in two individuals and astigmatism, cerebral visual impairment (CVI), optic atrophy and involuntary eye movements (nystagmus) in one individual each.
Brain imaging anomaliesAmong the patients who had an MRI, 40% had abnormalities. These include changes in white matter, prominent ventricles, Chiari malformation, periventricular nodular heterotopia and malrotation of the hippocampus. These changes are not consistent across individuals, although changes in white matter are the most frequently observed.
SeizuresSeizures have been reported in one third of individuals. Epilepsy and staring spells have also been reported.
Movement abnormalitiesChanges in movement are reported in 32% of individuals. One individual each has been diagnosed with cerebral palsy, abnormal involuntary (hyperkinetic) movements, slow, halted movements (bradykinesia) or involuntary movements of fingers or toes (choreathetoid movements). Two reported individuals have poor coordination or balance, and two individuals have ataxia.
Genitourinary abnormalitiesAbout one quarter of individuals have genitourinary abnormalities. These include multicystic kidneys, renal agenesis, kidney disease and lack of bladder control (neurogenic bladder). Retractile testes or undescended testes (cryptorchidism) has been reported in a small number of individuals.
Growth delayGrowth delay, primarily short stature, has been observed in 22% of individuals. Feeding issues in infancy have also been reported, including use of a feeding tube.

