SYNGAP1-related NSID

overview:
Summary
Intellectual disability (ID) is a common disorder defined by the presence of significant limitations in both cognitive and adaptive behaviors with onset before the age of 18. ID is subdivided into syndromic intellectual disability, in which intellectual deficits and distinguishing morphologic, radiologic or metabolic features are present, and non-syndromic intellectual disability (NSID), in which intellectual deficits appear without  these physical abnormalities. Mutations in theSYNGAP1gene are thought to be a relatively common cause of NSID. NSID patients, including those associated withSYNGAP1mutation, typically exhibit moderate to severe ID with varying degrees of epilepsy and/or autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and may also have attention deficits, impulsivity, and/or mood disorders.SYNGAP1-related NSID patients with epilepsy usually respond well to medications, yet some are refractory (difficult to control even with multiple drugs).SYNGAP1-related NSID is a sporadic condition that is caused byde novo(spontaneous, noninherited) mutations. The use of genomic sequencing has dramatically increased the capacity of physicians to identify these mutations.
Introduction
SYNGAP1-related NSID in humans was first reported in 2009 and is one of the first genes found to be associated with NSID. Since initially described, an increasing number of children withSYNGAP1-related NSID have been identified, suggesting that it may represent one of the most common causes of ID.

symptoms:
Children withSYNGAP1-related NSID present with mild hypotonia (low muscle tone) and global developmental delay at the end of the first year or during the second year of life. They can start to walk at a normal age but more frequently later in life (range: 14 months to 30 months of age). Rarely, their gait is described as being ataxic (unstable). Language development is also variably impaired with some children speaking with isolated words, associations of two or three words or with simple short sentences, whereas others remain non-verbal. Some of the children show oral dyspraxia (oral motor dysfunction), which can result in some drooling or eating difficulties.
While the primary disorder withSYNGAP1-related NSID is moderate to severe cognitive impairment, a subset of children are also diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Other behavioral abnormalities include inattention, impulsivity, and physical aggression (hitting, biting). Mood swings, sullenness, and rigidity are also reported in many children.
Approximately 2/3 of children withSYNGAP1-related NSID display epilepsy characterized by a variety of seizures including absences, myoclonia (brief, involuntary twitching of a group of muscles), generalized tonic-clonic seizures (grand mal seizures), and drop attacks. The seizures usually start during the first few years of life. Seizures are well controlled in most of the children with the administration of a single anti-epileptic drug but in some cases seizures are refractory.
The appearance and the growth of children withSYNGAP1-related NSID are not unusual. Some of the children will develop microcephaly (smaller head circumference). The presence of this feature does not correlate with the severity of the cognitive impairment.
Children (and presumably adults) withSYNGAP1-related NSID continue to develop, progressing at their own pace. Unless their epilepsy is not well controlled, they do not regress or deteriorate and can always continue to learn.

