Syphilis, Acquired

synonyms:
Lues, AcquiredVenereal Disease

overview:
Syphilis is a chronic infectious disease caused by the bacterium (microorganism) treponema pallidum. It is transmitted by direct contact with an infected lesion, usually through sexual intercourse. When untreated, syphilis progresses through primary, secondary and latent stages. The early stages of syphilis may not have any detectable symptoms. In some cases, symptoms can remain dormant for years. Eventually any tissue or vascular organ in the body may be affected.
Syphilis may also be acquired by the fetus in the uterus (congenital syphilis). Syphilis, especially when detected early, may be cured with appropriate treatment.

symptoms:
Untreated syphilis progresses through primary and secondary stages (which are infectious), and may end without further symptoms or continue to progress into a latent stage that may last for years.
Primary syphilis is characterized by lesions (chancres) of the skin, anus, vagina or moist surface of the mouth. These lesions present themselves from 10 to 90 days after an individual has been exposed to the organism and are found at the sight of contact with the infected person. The lesions are usually painless and start as small, solid elevations (papules) of the skin that gradually develop into raised, firm ulcers with a slight yellow discharge. When untreated, these lesions heal within four to six weeks and may leave scarring.
Secondary syphilis usually presents itself within two weeks to six months after the appearance of the primary lesions. This stage of the disorder is characterized by lesions of the skin and mucous membranes that may be pink or coppery in color, widespread, symmetrical, and follow the lines of skin cleavage. The skin lesions of secondary syphilis are infectious and most often found on the genitalia, palms, and soles of the feet. Symptoms such as loss of appetite, sore throat, headache, low-grade fever, muscle aches, nasal discharge, and swollen lymph nodes may occur. There is a relapse in 25 percent of the untreated cases, occurring most often in the first year. Secondary syphilis usually lasts two to six weeks and some of the lesions may leave scarring.
Latent syphilis occurs when primary and secondary syphilis have gone untreated. There are no noticeable symptoms, and the diagnosis can only be made through laboratory tests. Affected individuals are not contagious during this stage.  However, they may relapse during the first two to four years of infection, and infectious secondary syphilis lesions may reappear. In about one third of the cases the disease spontaneously cures itself. Another third will remain infected but show no signs of the disease (asymptomatic). The final third will eventually develop late syphilis.
Late syphilis, also known as tertiary syphilis, is not contagious and usually progresses slowly. Benign (non-contagious) tumors may develop on any part of the body. These tumors usually involve the skin and bones. Heart disease (cardiovascular problems), seizures, mental illness, personality changes, impotence, bladder dysfunction, and eye problems such as degeneration of the optic nerve of the eye (optic atrophy) and the development of Argyll Robertson pupils (pupils that fail to react to light but still react to distance) may also be present with late syphilis. Dementia and blindness may eventually result.
In approximately three to seven percent of cases, affected individuals may develop neurosyphilis during the early stages of syphilis. Neurosyphilis occurs when the syphilis bacteria spread to the central nervous system. Affected individuals may not develop any associated symptoms. In some cases, individuals will experience seizures, headaches, fevers, stiff neck, dementia, and behavioral abnormalities.

