Syringomyelia

synonyms:
hydromyeliaMorvan diseasesyringohydromyelia

overview:
Summary
Syringomyelia is a condition characterized by a fluid-filled cavity or cyst known as a syrinx that forms within the spinal cord. Syringomyelia is a chronic condition and a syrinx can expand over time compressing or destroying the surrounding nerve tissue. A wide variety of symptoms can potentially be associated with syringomyelia depending upon the size and exact location of the syrinx. Common signs/symptoms include pain in the neck and shoulders, muscle weakness, pain and stiffness in the legs, numbness or decreased sensation, especially to hot and cold, abnormal curvature of the spine (scoliosis), muscle contractions, and uncoordinated movements (ataxia). The majority of cases of syringomyelia are associated with a complex brain abnormality known as a Chiari malformation. Additional known causes of syringomyelia include tethered cord syndrome, meningitis (arachnoiditis), certain tumors of the spinal cord, and trauma. In some patients, no underlying cause can be identified (idiopathic).
Introduction
The terminology used in the medical literature to describe syringomyelia can be confusing. Syringomyelia is often associated with an abnormality of the craniovertebral junction, usually a Chiari malformation (types I and II), and these cases may be referred to as congenital syringomyelia. Secondary syringomyelia refers to cases that have a known cause. The term primary syringomyelia has been used to refer to cases of unknown cause or to cases that occur because of specific known causes that damage the spinal cord. Posttraumatic syringomyelia refers to cases that result from trauma to the spinal cord (these cases are sometimes sub-classified as primary syringomyelia).
Some individuals have a condition related to syringomyelia known as hydro(syringo)myelia, which is characterized by abnormal widening of the central canal of the spinal cord (the normal small canal running through the center of the spinal cord). Some physicians use the terms syringomyelia or hydromyelia interchangeably. Hydromyelia may also be present in infants and young children with or without brain abnormalities, such as Chiari malformation type II that is seen in patients with spina bifida. The fluid-filled cavities in cases of syringomyelia often do not connect to any other fluid-filled areas or spaces and occur more often in adults than children.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms and severity of syringomyelia can vary greatly from one person to another. Some individuals may not have any noticeable symptoms (asymptomatic); others may have a variety of symptoms that can progress to cause significant disability. It is important to note the highly variable nature of syringomyelia and to realize that affected individuals can have different sets of symptoms and a different rate of progression (or no progression of the disease at all).
Syringomyelia is usually slowly progressive, but rapid onset can occur. Common symptoms include pain in the neck and shoulders. Pain may also affect the arms and hands and may be described as a burning, tingling or piercing sensation. Some affected individuals also experience numbness or decreased sensation, especially to hot and cold. Muscle weakness and wasting, especially of the hands, arms, and eventually the shoulders, may also develop. The upper (cervical and thoracic) portions of the spinal cord are often affected in syringomyelia. Affected individuals may first notice a loss of feeling for pain and temperature in their fingers, hands, arms, and upper chest. In the early stages, a sense of touch is still present. A loss of feeling may spread over the shoulders and back, described as a “cape-like” distribution.
Affected individuals may also develop pain and stiffness (spasticity) in the legs and uncoordinated movements (ataxia), eventually affecting the ability to walk. In severe cases, paralysis of the arms or legs can occur. Some affected individuals may develop muscle contractions such as small, involuntary muscle contractions or “twitches” (fasciculations).
Skeletal abnormalities can develop including the abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis). In some children, scoliosis may be the only symptom. Some individuals may develop Charcot joints, in which chronic, progressive degeneration of the joint occurs because of damage to the nerves that supply the joint. Charcot joints are initially seen as swelling and redness of the affected areas. Without treatment, deformity of the affected joints can occur.
Some affected individuals develop symptoms associated with damage to the autonomic nervous system, which is the part of the nervous system that controls involuntary functions. Such symptoms include loss of bowel and bladder control, excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis), and fluctuating blood pressure levels. Horner’s syndrome, an uncommon condition that develops because of damage to one of the nerves that supplies the eyes and face, may also occur. Horner’s syndrome usually affects one side of the face and is characterized by a droopy eyelid, narrowing of the opening between the eyelids, decreased pupil size, and decreased sweating on the affected side of the face.
Individuals with syringomyelia associated with a Chiari malformation may also have a condition called hydrocephalus, in which there is an abnormal accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid in the brain. In infancy, hydrocephalus can cause a variety of symptoms including an abnormally enlarged head, vomiting, headache, sleepiness, irritability, seizures, and downward deviation of the eyes.

