Systemic Scleroderma

synonyms:
systemic sclerosisprogressive systemic sclerosis

overview:
Systemic scleroderma is a disease characterized by rapid growth of fibrous (connective) tissue that leads to scarring of skin and internal organs. Approximately one in 10,000 individuals is affected. It is more common in women and most often develops around age 30 to 50. Systemic scleroderma can affect almost any organ in the body, and there is a large variability of symptoms among affected individuals. One of the most common and earliest manifestations of the disease is Raynaud phenomenon, which involves blood vessel spasms (vasospasms) induced by cold temperature or stress. This can lead to temporary finger discoloration, numbness and pain and is also associated with the development of finger ulcers. Of note, Raynaud phenomenon also commonly occurs in healthy individuals. Other manifestations of systemic scleroderma include muscle and joint pain, skin tightening, and dilated blood vessels that can be seen through the skin (telangiectasias). Scarring of internal organs can also lead to gastrointestinal, pulmonary, cardiac, and renal disease. Although systemic scleroderma cannot be cured, many of the symptoms can be treated. A timely diagnosis is important to ensure appropriate management of the disease and associated complications.

symptoms:
Systemic scleroderma can affect multiple organ systems and therefore lead to numerous symptoms and complications. The symptoms present, their severity, the rate of progression of the disease, the response to treatment, and overall survival vary widely depending on the affected individual. In most cases, people start to develop symptoms between age 30 and 50. Symptoms related to the different organs involved are described below.
SkinIn most people, Raynaud phenomenon (RP) is the first manifestation of the disease. RP is characterized by blood vessel spams (vasospasm) in response to cold or stress. This most often occurs in the fingers and turns them white. Subsequently, as the vessels are occluded and cannot deliver oxygen, the fingers turn blue. This can also lead to severe pain and ulcers.  After several minutes (usually 15 to 20), the vasospasms stop and the fingers become red as blood flows again. Another very common symptom of systemic scleroderma is rapid growth of connective tissue in the skin (skin fibrosis). The earliest involved areas are the fingers, hands and face. Symptoms associated with skin fibrosis include tight and dry skin, itching (pruritus), fluid accumulation (edema) and increased or decreased skin pigmentation. Another skin manifestation seen in most patients with scleroderma is telangiectasia. Telangiectasias are small dilated blood vessels that can appear as red lesions visible through the skin. Affected individuals can also develop accumulation of calcium nodules in the fingers, forearm, elbows, and knees. This condition is known as calcinosis cutis and can lead to pain if the nodules are large.
Nerves, muscles, and jointsMany individuals living with systemic scleroderma develop muscle, joint, or nerve disease. Muscle involvement can lead to muscle pain, weakness, and muscle wasting (sarcopenia). Affected joints can be painful, stiff, and swollen. Nerve involvement is less common but can lead to burning or tingling sensation or numbness. In some individuals, the autonomic nervous system can be affected. This part of the nervous system is not under voluntarily control and is notably involved in self-regulation of the body. Dysfunction of the autonomic nervous system can lead to symptoms such as dizziness when standing up (orthostasis), inappropriate heart rate response to exertion, and inappropriate sweating.
LungsThe two main pulmonary manifestations of systemic scleroderma are pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) and interstitial lung disease (ILD). PAH is defined as increased pressure in the arteries of the lungs and can lead to shortness of breath (dyspnea), fatigue, and failure of the right ventricle of the heart, which in turn can cause chest pain, fluid accumulation (edema), and transient loss of consciousness upon exertion (exertional syncope). ILD corresponds to scarring (fibrosis) of lung tissue, which prevents lung expansion and gas exchange. The two main symptoms of ILD are progressive dyspnea and dry cough. PAH and ILD are progressive conditions and can eventually become life-threatening. Taken together, they account for about half of all deaths related to systemic scleroderma.
Gastrointestinal tractThe most commonly involved part of the gastrointestinal tract in systemic scleroderma is the esophagus. In affected individuals, the esophagus is unable to contract efficiently (esophageal dismotility) to allow food to reach the stomach. In addition, the lower esophageal sphincter (LES), which is a circular muscle between the esophagus and the stomach, is not able to close properly. The combination of esophageal dismotility and LES incompetence can lead to heartburn due to acid reflux (a condition known as gastroesophageal reflux disease; GERD), choking on food, and difficulty swallowing (dysphagia). Fibrosis of the rest of the gastrointestinal can prevent food from moving through properly (pseudo-obstruction), which can promote bacterial growth and lead to pain, bloating, constipation, diarrhea, and fecal incontinence. Gastrointestinal bleeding also occurs in some patients due to dilation of veins in the stomach (gastric venous ectasias).
HeartSystemic scleroderma can affect many parts of the heart, including the heart muscle itself (myocardium), the sac in which it is contained (pericardium), the arteries feeding it (coronary arteries and arterioles), and its electrical conduction system. The manifestations of cardiac involvement vary depending on the affected part of the heart and can include chest pain, shortness of breath, hearth rhythm abnormalities (arrhythmias) and inability of the heart to pump blood forward optimally (heart failure).
KidneysThe most significant renal manifestation of systemic scleroderma is scleroderma renal crisis (SRC). It is characterized by abrupt onset on severe high blood pressure (hypertension), renal failure, and abnormal protein excretion in the urine (proteinuria). Another feature of SRC is microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (MAHA). In this condition, the platelets present in the blood excessively form clots in small vessels. When red blood cells travel in these vessels, they get sheared by the platelet clots (hemolysis). MAHA therefore leads to a decreased number of red blood cells (anemia) and platelets (thrombocytopenia).
OthersIn addition to symptoms described above, people living with systemic scleroderma commonly experience fatigue, anxiety, sexual dysfunction and concerns with body image. Although the disease is potentially fatal and is associated with an increased risk of mortality, many affected individuals can live long, productive lives.
Clinical subsetsSystemic scleroderma is typically divided in four subsets with different clusters of symptoms. Limited cutaneous systemic sclerosis (lcSSc) is associated with skin fibrosis limited to the hands, forearm, feet and face, and usually prominent telangiectasias and calcinosis cutis. People with lcSSc can develop pulmonary arterial hypertension but very rarely develop scleroderma renal crisis and interstitial lung disease. Diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis is associated with rapid and diffuse skin fibrosis and early occurrence of renal, cardiac, and pulmonary complications. Systemic sclerosis sine scleroderma involves internal organ involvement of systemic scleroderma without the typical skin involvement. Systemic scleroderma overlap syndrome includes features of other connective tissue diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis or polymyositis and is notable for prominent joint and muscle involvement. Distinguishing the clinical subset of systemic scleroderma in an affected person is important as it can help predict the progression of the disease and the associated complications. However, not all patients fall within a specific subset and overlap between different categories is common.

