Takotsubo Cardiomyopathy

synonyms:
takotsubo syndromebroken heart syndromestress cardiomyopathyampulla cardiomyopathyapical ballooning syndromeTako-Tsubo cardiomyopathy

overview:
Summary

Takotsubo cardiomyopathy is a heart disease characterized by transient dysfunction and ballooning of the left ventricle of the heart. It mostly affects elderly women and is often triggered by severe physical or emotional stress. The symptoms are similar to those of a heart attack (myocardial infarction) and include chest pain, difficulty breathing (dyspnea), and sometimes transient loss of consciousness (syncope). Although complications can occur, most individuals fully recover within one month. The treatment of takotsubo cardiomyopathy is focused on symptom control and the prevention and treatment of associated complications.

Introduction

The role of the heart is to act as a pump to make sure blood is appropriately oxygenated and able to feed the body. The heart has four chambers: two small atria (left and right), which are located on top of the heart and two larger ventricles (also left and right), which are located below the atria and act as the main pump of the heart. Blood flows in the body the following way: 1) Blood in the left ventricle is ejected into the aorta, which redistributes oxygenated blood throughout the body 2) Oxygen in the blood is extracted by organs and deoxygenated blood comes back in the right atrium of the heart via the veins 3) Deoxygenated blood in the right atrium falls into the right ventricle 3) Deoxygenated blood is ejected from the right ventricle into the pulmonary arteries, where it will be able to take oxygen from the lungs 4) Oxygenated blood comes back to the left atrium via the pulmonary veins 5) Oxygenated blood in the left atrium falls into the left ventricle of the heart where the cycle can start again.
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy is a type of disease of cardiac muscle (cardiomyopathy) characterized by dysfunction and ballooning of a portion of the left ventricle of the heart, most often its tip (apex). It was first identified in Japan in the 1990s and was named after Japanese octopus traps (takotsubo) that are shaped similarly to the heart of affected individuals. Since that time, the condition has been recognized in individuals all over the world.

symptoms:
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy can occur in adults of any age, but most often develops in elderly females. The most common symptoms are the abrupt (acute) onset of crushing chest pain and difficulty breathing (dyspnea). Anxiety, sweating (diaphoresis), nausea, vomiting, palpitations and temporary loss of consciousness (syncope) can also occur.
Most individuals that develop takotsubo cardiomyopathy fully recover within one month and recurrence is rare. However, complications occur in about 20% of patients. In some individuals, the heart might be unable to pump blood efficiently (heart failure), which can lead to fatigue, dyspnea and leg and abdomen swelling due to fluid accumulation (edema). In severe cases, cardiac dysfunction might prevent organs from receiving adequate oxygen supply (cardiogenic shock). Takotsubo cardiomyopathy can also lead to an irregular, too fast, or too slow heartbeat (arrhythmia). Another possible complication is pooling of blood in the heart, which promotes clot formation. These clots can be expulsed from the heart and lodge into arteries of the brain, which can lead to a stroke. Despite the possibility of complications, more than 90% of affected individuals survive takotsubo cardiomyopathy.

