TANC2-Related Disorders

synonyms:
intellectual developmental disorder with autistic features and language delay, with or without seizures

overview:
Summary
TANC2-related disorders are categorized as a neurodevelopmental syndrome with associated psychiatric findings. This condition is caused by changes (disease-causing variants) in theTANC2gene. Characteristics of this disorder include autism, developmental delay, seizures, sleep disturbances, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and intellectual disability. It is important to note that these features can also have different genetic causes.
TANC2-related disorders are reported to have variable expressivity, meaning there is a range of symptoms that can occur in people affected with this genetic condition. In addition to the symptoms mentioned above, common symptoms include delayed motor development, delayed speech development and some patients have been reported with seizures (epilepsy). Additional features seen in patients affected withTANC2-related disorders are chronic constipation, distinct facial features that vary within a family and walking difficulties. The average age of onset for many symptoms begins in childhood.

Introduction
TANC2-related disorders were first defined in 2019, therefore, this disorder has a wide and evolving spectrum of neurodevelopmental and psychiatric symptoms.
TheTANC2gene holds instructions for creating (encoding) a protein called TANC2. This protein helps control connections between brain cells (synapse scaffold proteins). Having proper support for the synapse allows nerve cells to respond to stimuli. Genetic changes in theTANC2gene lead to abnormally shaped proteins that cause the cells to not respond to stimuli. When nerve cells are not able to respond properly to signals, it can lead to the symptoms associated withTANC2-related disorders.

symptoms:
Individuals withTANC2-related disorders have a spectrum of neurodevelopmental conditions. These can include autism, intellectual disability, language delays and motor delays. There have been reports of patients with aTANC2genetic change having seizures. In these patients, brain imaging is typically normal. Some adult patients display psychiatric conditions such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and compulsive behavior. Dysregulation of non-voluntary body functions (dysautonomia) has also been documented. Low blood pressure, feeling faint, excessive or lack of sweating, fatigue, trouble swallowing, fast or slow heart rate, anxiety and drooling are all symptoms of dysautonomia.
Other reported features ofTANC2-related disorders include chronic constipation; walking difficulties; differences in facial features (widely spaced front teeth, large ears, thick eyebrows, large mouth); smaller head size (microcephaly) and sleep disturbances.

