TANGO2 Deficiency Disorder

synonyms:
TANGO2-related metabolic encephalopathy and arrhythmiasmetabolic encephalomyopathic crises, recurrent, with rhabdomyolysis, cardiac arrhythmias, and neurodegenerationTANGO2-related disease

overview:
TANGO2 deficiency disorder is a rare genetic disorder caused by disease causing changes in theTANGO2gene. Affected individuals experience episodes of acute illness called metabolic crises. These episodes can be triggered, often by a preceding infection or from decreased oral intake or fasting for an extended period of time. Irregularities in the rhythm of the heart (arrhythmias), the breakdown of muscle tissue (rhabdomyolysis) and other complications can occur during an episode. The term encephalopathy is a general term for brain disease. Neurological problems including intellectual disability and delays in reaching developmental milestones can occur. Additional signs and symptoms can occur both within and outside of metabolic crisis. TANGO2 deficiency can affect people very differently. There is no cure for the disorder, but research is underway to better understand and treat this disease. Current treatment is aimed at the specific symptoms present in each individual.

symptoms:
Although researchers have been able to establish a clear syndrome with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about the basis of these symptoms remains unclear. Parents should talk to their children’s physician and medical team about their specific case, associated symptoms and overall prognosis.
TANGO2 deficiency is a variable disorder. This means that how the disorder affects people can vary greatly from one affected individual to another. Therefore, it is important to note that affected individuals may not have all the symptoms discussed below. Affected individuals can first experience episodes of acute illness called metabolic crisis. Affected individuals often present with symptoms before a metabolic crisis is apparent. These symptoms can include delays in reaching developmental milestones (developmental delays) and regression, poor gait coordination, clumsiness, low functioning thyroid gland (hypothyroidism) or seizures. Episodic symptoms termed as TANGO2 spells can be seen in many individuals characterized by sudden onset of head tilt, body tilt, inability to walk properly, loss of coordination, significant leg tightness and extreme fatigue.
During a metabolic crisis there can be low blood sugar (hypoglycemia, elevated liver enzymes (transaminitis), elevated creatinine kinase and troponin (enzymes found in skeletal and heart muscle) and a buildup of toxic substances including ammonia (hyperammonemia) and lactic acid in the blood (lactic acidosis). A metabolic crisis is often triggered, usually by illness or from eating poorly or fasting for an extended period of time. Stress or dehydration can also trigger an episode. A metabolic crisis may develop rapidly (acutely) and can cause profound muscle weakness, loss of coordination (ataxia), disorientation and, in severe instances, unconsciousness (comatose state).
During a metabolic crisis, individuals develop a condition called rhabdomyolysis, in which muscle tissue breaks down. Muscle pain (myalgia), muscle weakness and fatigue can develop. When muscle tissue breaks down, it produces substances that are released into the body including creatinine kinase (CK) and a protein called myoglobulin. Myoglobin can build up in the urine (myoglobinuria). This can cause the urine to appear dark brown. Myoglobinuria can potentially lead to damage of the kidneys. The kidneys have several functions in the body including filtering waste products from the blood. Myoglobulins can cause obstruction of tiny structures in the kidneys called tubules, which damages the kidney. Kidney damage can cause decreased kidney function and eventually kidney failure.
During an acute illness, affected individuals may develop irregular heart rhythms (arrhythmias), abnormalities in the resting electrocardiogram (ECG), and decreased ability for the heart to pump (cardiac dysfunction). All children should have a baseline ECG and echocardiogram which should be followed and repeated during crisis. The most common abnormality during an acute crisis is QT prolongation. Prolongation of the QT interval refers to a change seen on the ECG. QT prolongation predisposes affected individuals to an increased risk of life-threatening rhythm disturbances, specifically ventricular tachycardia or torsade de pointes. These abnormal rhythms originate from the bottom pumping chamber of the heart. In addition to the QT prolongation, some affected individuals also develop Brugada type I changes in their ECG, which is a specific pattern in the ECG that also predisposes the individuals to life-threatening heart rhythm problems (ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation). While QT prolongation persists until the crisis has resolved, Brugada changes can come and go and thus ECGs and telemetry (which is active bedside monitoring of the electrical activity of the heart during hospitalization) should be monitored throughout the crisis. These arrhythmias can lead to sudden loss of consciousness (syncope), cardiac arrest, and potentially cause sudden cardiac death.
Arrhythmias that occur during metabolic crisis develop rapidly and can be extremely difficult to manage. Arrhythmias are the leading cause of death among children affected byTANGO2gene alterations. In addition to arrhythmias, the heart muscle can develop dysfunction (cardiomyopathy). This means the heart can develop heart failure, meaning the heart cannot pump well. It is therefore important that all children in crisis be followed by specialists, who have expertise in heart arrhythmia and cardiomyopathy disorders.
Affected individuals will also have neurodevelopmental problems including intellectual disability, seizures and problems coordinating voluntary movements (ataxia) causing clumsiness and an unsteady way of walking (unsteady gait) and difficulty with speech (dysarthria). Intellectual disability can range in severity from mild to moderate to severe.. Many affected individuals experience developmental delay, or they experience the loss of developmental milestones that they have already reached (regression). About half of the affected individuals have seizures that usually respond to medications. In a subset of children, these can be difficult to control. In addition, muscle weakness can result in sporadic head or body tilting and difficulty opening the eyelids and drooling and difficulty swallowing. These episodes can come and go within hours.
Some individuals have increased muscle tone in their legs, which can cause muscles to be tight even at rest. Some children are noted to walk on their toes. Some children may have a reduced ability to stretch. Increased muscle tone can lead to spasticity.
Some individuals have low function of the thyroid (hypothyroidism). The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland located at the base of the neck. The thyroid is part of the endocrine system, the network of glands that secrete hormones that regulate the chemical processes (metabolism) that influence the body’s activities such as the heart rate, body temperature and blood pressure. Hormones are secreted directly into the bloodstream where they travel to various areas of the body. Symptoms of hypothyroidism in children can include fatigue, constipation, low muscle tone and growth delay.
Additional symptoms that have been reported include exaggerated or heightened reflexes (hyperreflexia) and temporary misalignment of the eyes where one or both eyes are turned outward away from the nose (exotropia). In rare instances, affected children have developed sensorineural hearing loss. Sensorineural hearing loss occurs when the nerves within the ear cannot properly send sensory input (sound) to the brain.

