Tarlov Cysts

synonyms:
perineural cystssacral, lumbar, thoracic or cervical nerve root cysts

overview:
Summary
Tarlov cysts are fluid-filled sacs that affect the nerve roots of the spine, especially near the base of the spine (sacral region). Individuals may be affected by multiple cysts of varying size. Symptoms can occur depending upon the size and specific location of the cyst. Generally, the larger a Tarlov cyst is, the more likely it is to cause symptoms. Symptoms sometimes caused by Tarlov cysts include pain in the area served by the affected nerves, numbness and altered sensation, an inability to control bladder and bowel movements (incontinence), impotence, and, rarely, weakness in the legs. Small, asymptomatic cysts can slowly increase in size eventually causing symptoms. The exact cause of Tarlov cysts is unknown, but they may occur due to variation in normal development of the nerve sheath. Tarlov cysts were first described in the medical literature in 1938.

symptoms:
Many cases of Tarlov cysts are not associated with symptoms (asymptomatic). However, Tarlov cysts can grow in size eventually compressing or damaging adjacent nerve roots or nerves contained within the cyst (radiculopathy). The specific symptoms and their severity vary from one individual to another and with location along the spinal column.
Chronic pain is a common with symptomatic Tarlov cysts. Pain from lumbo-sacral cysts may affect the lower back, especially below the waist, and spread to the buttocks and legs. Pain may be worsened by walking (neurogenic claudication). Symptoms may become progressively worse. In some individuals sitting or standing may worsen pain; recumbency may relieve pain. In some cases, pain can also affect the upper back, neck, arms and hands if the cysts are located in the upper spine. Pain may worsen when coughing or sneezing. Affected individuals have also reported vulvar, testicular, rectal, pelvic and abdominal pain.
Because Tarlov cysts can affect the nerves, symptoms relating to loss of neurological function can also develop including leg weakness, diminished reflexes, loss of sensation on the skin, and changes in bowel or bladder function such as incontinence or painful urination (dysuria). Some individuals may have difficulty empting the bladder and constipation has also been reported. Changes in sexual function such as impotence can also occur.
Affected individuals may also develop abnormal burning or prickling sensations (paresthesias) or numbness and decreased sensitivity (dysesthesia), especially in the legs or feet. Tenderness or soreness may be present around the involved area of the spine.
Additional symptoms have been reported in the medical literature including chronic headaches, blurred vision, pressure behind the eyes, dizziness, and dragging of the foot when walking due to weakness of the muscles in the ankles and feet (foot drop). Some individuals demonstrate progressive thinning (erosion) of the spinal bone overlying the cyst.

