Tarsal Carpal Coalition Syndrome

synonyms:
NOG-related-symphalangism spectrum disorderTCC

overview:
Summary
Tarsal carpal coalition syndrome (TCC) is a rare genetic condition that is primarily characterized by fusion of the bones of the hands, wrists, feet and ankles, but may involve other areas such as the elbow. The most common symptoms are worsening stiffness, pain, immobility and deformity of the affected joints. TCC is caused by changes (pathogenic variants or mutations) in theNOGgene leading to overgrowth of bone or other tissues in the affected joints. Treatment options include physical therapy, occupational therapy and surgery aimed at reducing pain, improving joint mobility, correcting joint deformity and maintaining patient independence. Early diagnosis can lead to improved patient outcomes and better quality of life.

Introduction
TCC was first described in 1985 in a family with multiple affected members. In 2001, multiple genetic pathogenic variants of theNOGgene were reported to be associated with this disorder. Since then, additional pathogenic variants have been identified in this gene and have been associated with a range of similar conditions. Some scientists suggest classifying these conditions asNOGgene-related symphalangism spectrum disorders, where symphalangism refers to the fusion of finger or toe joints. Tarsal carpal coalition syndrome can be differentiated from otherNOGgene-related symphalangism spectrum disorders by the absence of conductive hearing loss, abnormal facial features, or asymmetry of spinal curvature and the chest.

symptoms:
The most common initial signs and symptoms of tarsal carpal coalition syndrome are worsening joint stiffness, joint pain and joint deformity. Common complaints include pain with walking and abnormal walking pattern (gait).
Tarsal-carpal coalition syndrome is a progressive disease that is characterized by abnormal development that leads to the fusion of bones in the distal joints. The wrists/hands (carpals, phalanges/fingers) and ankles/feet (tarsals, phalanges/toes) are most affected. Involvement of the hand often is most noticeable in the pinky finger and spreads towards the thumb, but the thumb is often spared. Progressive fusion of the bones in these regions that may cause deformities such as inward or outward twisting of the feet, flat feet, shortening of the fingers or toes (brachydactyly), abnormal curvature of the fingers (clinodactyly) or partial to near complete fusion of the fingers or toes (syndactyly).
These deformities may be detected while a patient is still in the womb, and symptoms such as reduced range of motion in the fingers/toes, elbows and ankles may be seen at birth. There is often a family history of the condition and older family members may have similar but more advanced symptoms such as fixed flexion of joints, fusion of fingers and fusion of many small bones in the hands and/or feet.
If diagnosed at birth, babies with TCC may show stiffness or decreased/absent movement of finger joints, wrists, and elbows, shortening of fingers/toes, and fixed joint deformities such as clubfoot (inward deviation of the foot). In adults, symptoms are often more severe (since symptoms have had a longer time to progress) and may include fixed flexion deformities of the elbows, fusion of the fingers/toes, shortening of the fingers/toes, extensive fusion of the small bones of the hands and feet (carpal & tarsal bones) and limited range of motion in joints such as the fingers/toes, wrist, ankles and elbows. If not initially detected, adults with tarsal carpal coalition syndrome may have a history of delayed fine and gross motor development such as inability to bring things to their mouth, impaired ability to form a fist, difficulty raising their arms above their shoulders or fully straightening or supinating the forearms, trouble placing their thighs on floor when seated with folded legs and a history of abnormal walking gait. This is due to overgrowth of tissues in the affected joints leading to stiffness.
Patients with TCC may have low-to-normal height and weight, but normal intelligence and lifespan.

