Tarsal Tunnel Syndrome

overview:
Tarsal tunnel syndrome is a rare disorder caused by damage to the tibial nerve or its branches, usually due to compression as it passes through the tarsal tunnel (entrapment neuropathy). The tarsal tunnel is a narrow passageway bound by bone and soft tissue that lies on the inside of the ankle. The tibial nerve (as well as certain blood vessels and tendons) passes through the tarsal tunnel. However, the term tarsal tunnel syndrome is often broadly applied to any pain along the tibial nerve, which can result from a multitude of causes. Individuals with tarsal tunnel syndrome may experience pain, burning, or a tingling sensation along the tibial nerve.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms of tarsal tunnel syndrome can vary from one person to another. In some cases, symptoms can develop suddenly, and in others gradually. Some affected individuals may experience a sharp, shooting pain along the tibial nerve. This nerve branches off from the sciatic nerve and runs down the lower leg to the ankle and then the foot. Pain can be severe enough to cause a person to limp. Affected individuals may describe a radiating pain that cannot be localized to one spot. In addition to or instead of pain, affected individuals may experience numbness of the affected area or a burning or tingling sensation (paresthesia), which is often described as similar to “pins and needles”.
In some individuals, symptoms may affect one spot such as the inside of the ankle. In other individuals, symptoms can affect the ankle, heel and foot. For example, pain may radiate from the ankle down to the heel or even the foot, depending on which section of the nerve is affected. Less frequently, pain may radiate up from the ankle to the calf.
The symptoms of tarsal tunnel syndrome are often worsened by activity such as prolonged standing or walking. Consequently, pain may worsen throughout an active day. Symptoms are usually relieved by rest. However, as the disorder progresses, some affected individuals have reported pain that occurs during rest or at night when attempting to sleep.

