Tatton Brown Rahman Syndrome

synonyms:
TBRSDNMT3A overgrowth syndrome

overview:
Summary
Tatton Brown Rahman Syndrome (TBRS), also known as DNMT3A overgrowth syndrome, was first identified in 2014. TBRS is a complex multisystem disorder involving many different tissues including the nervous system, muscle and blood. It is associated with tall stature, increased weight and/or large head circumference (macrocephaly). Individuals typically have mild to severe intellectual disability, as well as subtle but distinctive facial characteristics. There are a variety of other symptoms associated with TBRS, such as low muscle tone, behavioral and mental health issues, orthopedic problems, heart defects and autism, but not all individuals have every clinical finding reported and the syndrome varies considerably in its severity.
TBRS is caused by germline/constitutional variants (pathogenic variants) in theDNMT3Agene. Germline/constitutional refers to a variant that is present in all cells. MostDNMT3Agene variants occur spontaneously (de novo) which means they are not inherited from a parent. Some individuals have inherited the disorder from an affected parent in an autosomal dominant pattern. As of 2022, approximately 300 individuals have been diagnosed with TBRS, though the number of individuals with TBRS is likely much higher.

symptoms:
The severity and symptoms of TBRS vary from person to person. Patients and parents should consult with their physician to determine risks for specific symptoms and a plan for medical management.
Distinctive Facial AppearanceIndividuals with TBRS tend to have facial characteristics that include low-set, heavy, horizontal eyebrows, prominent upper central incisors, rounded face and a reduction in the vertical space between the upper and lower eyelids (narrow palpebral fissures).
OvergrowthMost individuals with TBRS have a larger head circumference than average at birth (macrocephaly) and/or tall stature.
ObesityMany individuals with TBRS are overweight and may be diagnosed with obesity.
Intellectual Disability and Developmental DelayIntellectual disability (ID) can vary across patients, with a spectrum of mild to severe ID. Patients also experience developmental delays (DD), which may be present in motor function, speech, language, cognitive abilities and social skills. Severity of DD varies among patients, though nonverbal and spatial reasoning skills appear to be more significantly affected in these individuals than verbal reasoning.
Psychiatric and Behavioral DisordersPsychiatric and behavioral disorders are common in individuals with TBRS and may take different forms. The most common behavioral diagnosis in TBRS patients is autism spectrum disorder. Other psychiatric and behavioral problems that have been identified in TBRS patients include anxiety, aggression, psychotic disorders, bipolar disorder, obsessive behaviors and compulsive eating.

