TCF7L2-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder

synonyms:
TRND

overview:
TCF7L2-related neurodevelopmental disorder (TRND) is a newly discovered disorder caused by a change (variant or mutation) in theTCF7L2gene. This mutation may be responsible for developmental delays in childhood, intellectual disability, autism, myopia, ADHD, abnormal physical features and other problems. There is a wide spectrum of severity for individuals affected with TRND. Many of the symptoms of TRND overlap with other neurodevelopmental disorders. TRND must be diagnosed with a genetic test and cannot be diagnosed by symptoms alone.

symptoms:
There is a wide spectrum of severity for individuals affected with TRND. Affected children tend to have developmental delays such as delayed speech and motor milestones. Some children may grow up to have average intellectual abilities, while others may have mild/moderate intellectual disability. Some individuals with TRND may also have autism spectrum disorder (ASD), social communication deficits, speech-language impairment and/or attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). About half of those with the mutation may have nearsightedness (myopia) or vision impairments. Some children have been reported to have abnormal physical features such as a curved spine (scoliosis) and abnormal chest shape. However, the significance of these findings is still unknown. Many of the symptoms of TRND overlap with other neurodevelopmental disorders.
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is characterized by lack of interest, repetitive behaviors and issues with social interaction and communication. Patients may also have problems with eye contact and other nonverbal social communications, as well as difficulty making and maintaining relationships with peers. Early symptoms of ASD (at about 1-2 years) are poor eye contact, limited response to name, little gesturing and regression of language skills. Toddlers may demonstrate little pretend play and very intense interests. Children may have trouble with literal thinking and emotions.

