Tenosynovial Giant Cell Tumor

synonyms:
giant cell tumor of the tendon sheath (GCTTS)nodular tenosynovitisdiffuse-type giant cellpigmented vilonodular synovitis (PVNS)

overview:
Summary
Tenosynovial giant cell tumors (TGCTs) are a group of rare, typically non-life-threatening tumors that involve the synovium, bursae and tendon sheath. Synovium is the thin layer of tissue or membrane that covers the inner surface of the joint spaces and the bursae and tendon sheaths. The bursae are small fluid-filled sacs that cushion bones, tendons and muscles around the joints. A tendon sheath is a layer membrane that covers a tendon. Tendons are fibrous tissue that connects muscle to bone.
These tumors cause the affected synovium, bursae or tendon sheaths to thicken and overgrow. They are benign, which means they are not cancerous and do not spread to other areas of the body (metastasize). However, they can grow and cause damage to the surrounding tissue and structures of the affected limb. Symptoms can include pain, swelling, tenderness, warmth at the location and limitation of movement of the joint. Large or small joints can be affected depending upon the tumor subtype. In localized TGCT, smaller joints tend to be affected, such as digits and parts of the foot. In diffuse TGCT, large joints tend to be involved, most commonly the knee. Surgery is often the initial treatment option. However, depending on the subtype, the tumor can recur, particularly in diffuse TGCT which was previously known as pigmented villonodular synovitis (PVNS). If untreated or if the tumor continually recurs, they can result in damage and degeneration of the affected joint and surrounding tissues or structures. Sometimes, they can cause significant disability. In rare cases, amputation is warranted.

Introduction
The terminology used to describe these tumors in medical literature is varied and confusing. The World Health Organization (WHO) classified these tumors in 2013 with the nomenclature “tenosynovial giant cell tumor”. This classification defines two distinct types of tenosynovial giant cell tumor: localized and diffuse. Localized TGCT encompassed the previously known giant cell tumor of the tendon sheath (GCTTS), tenosynovitis and nodular synovitis. Diffuse TGCT encompasses formerly known pigmented villonodular synovitis (PVNS). Diffuse TGCT was also called diffuse-type PVNS or diffuse-type giant cell tumor.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms of tenosynovial giant cell tumors (TGCTs) can vary depending upon the exact location involved and the subtype present. Symptoms tend to be non-specific, and most patients report pain and swelling as a symptom of the disease. Other symptoms include limitation in range of motion, tenderness to the touch, warmth coming from the joint, clicking or popping of the joint and stiffness.
Diffuse TGCT(also known as diffuse-type giant cell tumor; formerly, PVNS)
Diffuse TGCT usually affects a large joint; the tumor is widespread (diffuse) and affects the entire or most of the joint. TGCT is a monoarticular disease, meaning only one joint is involved. The knee is most often affected, followed by the ankle and hip. The elbow or shoulder can also be affected. In rare instances, the two joints that connect the jaw bones to the skull (temporomandibular joints) or the joints that connect vertebrae together (spinal facet joints) can be affected.
The initial symptoms are usually pain and swelling of the affected joint. Stiffness of the joint and reduction in range of motion can also occur. Usually, these symptoms have a gradual onset. There may be a feeling of warmth or tenderness on the skin of the affected joint. A painless swelling of the joint is sometimes the first sign. Sometimes, swelling can be significant. Affected individuals may have a sensation of the affected joint ‘locking’ or ‘catching.’ There may be a popping sound on occasion and the joint may feel unstable. Symptoms can occur suddenly and intermittently and are often referred to as a “flare”.
Diffuse TGCT can progress to cause arthritic damage and degeneration to the joint and damage to the surrounding cartilage and bone. If untreated, diffuse TGCT can potentially cause chronic, debilitating disease and significant functional impairment of the affected joint. Surgery is the main form of initial treatment, but the disease often recurs. With the discovery of drug options, the initial treatment may not always be surgery if the disease cannot be removed in its entirety. More often, drug options are used following recurrence or when patients have high risk of recurrence or morbidity (complications or consequences) from surgery. In asymptomatic patients, an active surveillance approach may be taken due to the high recurrence rate. Active surveillance includes MRIs to monitor disease and evaluation of symptoms.
Localized TGCT(Intraarticular GCTTS, formerly localized PVNS; extraarticular GCTTS; formerly nodular tenosynovitis)
Localized TGCT usually presents as a growth or mass of abnormal tissue (nodules) or as a small growth that is connected to the affected area with a stalk of abnormal tissue (pedunculated mass). These tumors are usually limited to a specific area of the joint (localized), are well-defined (encapsulated) and typically affect smaller joints such as those of the hands and toes. However, localized TGCT can impact other joints such as the knee. The initial sign is often a swelling. The tumor grows slowly over time. Sometimes they cause pain. Eventually, affected individuals may have a sensation of the affected joint ‘locking’ or ‘catching.’ The affected joint may become unstable. Unlike the diffuse form, these tumors are unlikely to cause destructive changes to the joint or surrounding areas and are less likely to recur after treatment. Surgery is the main form of treatment and is often curative.

