Testicular Cancer

overview:
Summary

Testicular cancer is an uncommon form of cancer and accounts for only 1% of all cancers in men. However, it is the most common form of cancer in men between the ages of 15 and 35. In the United States, approximately 8,850 men are diagnosed annually. About 95% of testicular cancers are germ cell tumors. Symptoms can be similar to a variety of conditions. It is one of the most treatable forms of cancer and is usually curable with surgery and sometimes radiation therapy or chemotherapy.

Introduction

Testicular cancer is an uncommon form of cancer that arises in the testicles (testes). The testicles are the two small, egg-shaped glands that are located within the scrotum, which is the loose sack of skin found below the penis. The testicles produce sperm and male sex hormones. Germ cells are the cells that develop into the embryo and later on become the cells that make up the reproductive system of men and women.
Approximately 95% of testicular cancers are germ cell tumors. Germ cells make up the reproductive system of men and women. Most germ cell tumors occur in the testes or ovaries (gonads) or the lower back. When these tumors occur outside of the gonads, they are known as extragonadal tumors. Testicular germ cell tumors are generally split into two main subtypes: seminomas and nonseminomatous germ cell tumors (NSGCTs). NSGCTs are sometimes referred to as nonseminomas. Each type accounts for about 50% of testicular germ cell tumors. There are several different types of nonseminomas including choriocarcinoma, yolk sac tumor, embryonal carcinoma, and teratoma. The 5% of people who develop a non-germ cell tumor may develop lymphoma affecting the testicles or a sex cord-stromal tumor, which is a tumor that arises from the supportive tissues of the testicles.

symptoms:
The initial sign of a testicular tumor is often a firm, painless bump (nodule) or swelling of one testicle. Some individuals have initially developed a dull ache in the abdomen or groin region, or a feeling of heaviness in the scrotum. Sometimes, there may be a collection of fluid in testicles. Discomfort or pain in the testicles may also be present upon touch. Less often, rapid, severe pain may develop in the affected testicle. In rare instances, tenderness or enlargement of the breasts or lower back pain may occur.
In about 10% of affected individuals, the initial signs or symptoms of testicular cancer will develop because the cancer has spread (metastasized) away from the testicles. This can vary depending upon the specific area of the body to which the cancer has spread. This can include a mass in the neck; a cough or difficulty breathing if affecting the lungs; bone pain if affecting the skeleton; nausea and vomiting; unintended weight loss; and gastrointestinal bleeding if affecting the area behind the duodenum, which is the first part of the small intestine (retroduodenal area).

