Tethered Cord Syndrome

synonyms:
TCStethered spinal cord syndrome

overview:
Tethered cord syndrome is a stretch-induced functional disorder associated with the fixation (tethering) effect of inelastic tissue on the caudal spinal cord, limiting its movement. This abnormal attachment is associated with progressive stretching and increased tension of the spinal cord as a child ages, potentially resulting in a variety of neurological and other symptoms. Due to the variation of the growth rate of the spinal cord and the spinal column, the progression of neurological signs and symptoms is highly variable. Some individuals present with tethered cord syndrome at birth (so-called congenital), while others develop the symptomatology in infancy or early childhood. Other individuals may not develop any noticeable symptoms until adulthood. Although some authors call these cases acquired, the majority of these cases are mostly developmental, corresponding to the progressive development of excess fibrous connective tissue (fibrosis) in the filum terminale. The filum terminale is a strand of tissue that bridges the spinal cord tip and the tailbone (sacrum). The inelastic structures in children originated from defective closure of the neural tube (the precursor of the spinal cord) during embryonic development, eventually forming a condition known as spina bifida. Because of its functional (physiological) nature, tethered cord syndrome can be reversible if surgically treated in its early stage.

symptoms:
The specific symptoms, severity and progression of tethered cord syndrome vary from one individual to another. In most cases, individuals experience symptoms during childhood. In some cases, symptoms are stabilized in childhood, but become apparent only in adulthood.
A high percentage of pediatric cases, with tethered cord syndrome show cutaneous tufts of hair, skin tags, dimples, benign fatty tumors, skin discoloration or hemangiomas. Additional symptoms include lower back pain that worsens with activity and improves with rest (although rarely complained by young children, because of inability to express pain), leg pain or numbness, difficulty walking (gait disturbances), foot and spinal deformities, such as abnormal side-to-side curvature of the spine (scoliosis) or hollow lowback (exaggerated lordosis), high-arched feet and hammertoes, and less commonly difference in leg strength. Tethered cord syndrome can also cause difficulties with bladder and bowel control. Affected children may experience involuntary urination or defecation (incontinence) and repeated urinary tract infections. Symptoms in children may be slowly progressive.
Adult onset of tethered cord syndrome was considered to be rare for many years, but an increasing number of cases have been reported in recent years. This trend is due to improvement in neurological examinations and in the interpretation of imaging studies. Symptoms common to adult tethered cord syndrome include constant, often severe back and leg pain, which may extend to the rectum and genital area in some cases. Progressive sensory and motor deficits may affect the legs potentially resulting in numbness, weakness or muscle wasting (atrophy) in the affected areas. More than 50 percent of the affected individuals experience bladder and bowel dysfunction, manifested by increased frequency or urgency of urination or constipation. In some cases, a fluid-filled cavity (syrinx) is found, sometimes associated with typical signs and symptoms syringomyelia, such as burning pain in the analgesic (painless on examination) area, decreased motor function and loss of muscle mass, or occasional headaches,

