Tetrasomy 9p

synonyms:
chromosome 9, tetrasomy 9ptetrasomy, short arm of chromosome 9chromosome 9p tetrasomyisochromosome 9ptetrasomy of short arm of chromosome 9tetrasomy type 9p

overview:
Tetrasomy 9p is a very rare chromosomal disorder in which the short arm of the ninth chromosome (9p) appears four times (tetrasomy) rather than twice in all or some cells of the body. Individuals with a normal chromosomal make-up (karyotype) have two number 9 chromosomes, both of which have a short arm (“9p”) and a long arm (“9q”). In individuals with tetrasomy 9p, four short arms (9p) are present in cells rather than the normal two.
The symptoms of tetrasomy 9p may vary greatly in range and severity from person to person. Associated abnormalities may include mild growth delay, moderate to severe delay in the attainment of skills requiring the coordination of muscular and mental activities (psychomotor delay) and/or moderate to severe intellectual disability. In addition, the disorder may be characterized by various physical abnormalities such as malformations of the skull and facial differences, abnormalities of the hands and fingers, skeletal malformations and/or heart (cardiac) defects. Tetrasomy 9p appears to result from spontaneous (de novo) errors very early in embryonic development that occur for unknown reasons (sporadically).

symptoms:
Tetrasomy 9p is a very rare chromosomal disorder in which the short arm of chromosome 9 (9p) appears four times (tetrasomy) rather than twice in cells of the body. In most patients, this chromosomal abnormality is present in all cells of the body; however, in some affected people, only some cells have tetrasomy 9p and other cells have a normal chromosomal make-up, and this is called mosaicism. Symptoms vary in affected individuals, depending upon whether mosaicism is present and, if so, what percentage of cells contain the tetrasomy 9p abnormality.
People with tetrasomy 9p may have a variety of physical and developmental abnormalities. Physical characteristics associated with the disorder may include abnormalities of the head and facial differences such as an unusually small head (microcephaly), abnormally wide spaces between fibrous joints (sutures) and bones in the skull (fontanelles), widely spaced eyes (ocular hypertelorism) and/or an abnormally rounded (bulbous) or beaked nose. Other facial differences may include vertical skin folds on either side of the nose that may cover the eyes’ inner corners (epicanthal folds) and/or unusually a small, receding jawbone (microretrognathia). Affected individuals may also have a short neck, low-set, misshapen (dysplastic) ears, and/or various malformations of the hands and fingers, such as improperly developed (dysplastic) fingernails, fifth fingers that are abnormally bent (clinodactyly) and short (brachymesophalangy) and a single, deep crease across the palms of the hands (simian crease).
Most people with tetrasomy 9p also have abnormal skeletal development (dysplasia). As a result, their symptoms may include abnormally reduced bone mass (osteopenia), incomplete closure of bones in the spinal column surrounding the spinal cord (spina bifida occulta) and/or a sideways and front-to-back curvature of the spine (kyphoscoliosis). Other features may include abnormally prominent ribs (angulated costal arches) and/or delayed development (ossification) of the pelvic bone, the hip bones and/or the shaft of the thigh bones (femoral heads).
Some people with tetrasomy 9p may have additional physical abnormalities, including heart (cardiac) malformations and/or abnormalities of the eyes, such as sinking in of the eyeballs (enophthalmos) and/or crossing of the eyes (strabismus). Cerebral spaces in the brain (ventricles) may be abnormally widened (dilated), inhibiting the normal flow of cerebrospinal fluid; as a result, the fluid may accumulate in the skull and put pressure on brain tissue (hydrocephalus). Rarely, affected individuals may have incomplete closure of the lip and the roof of the mouth (cleft lip and palate); kidney (renal) abnormalities and/or failure of one or both testes to descend into the scrotum (cryptorchidism) in affected males.
Most people with tetrasomy 9p also have developmental abnormalities, such as low birthweight, mild growth delay and/or moderate to severe delay in the attainment of skills requiring coordination of muscular and mental activity (psychomotor delay). Moderate to severe intellectual disability may also be present.

