Tetralogy of Fallot

synonyms:
Fallot's Tetralogypulmonic stenosis-ventricular septal defect

overview:
Summary
Tetralogy of Fallot is the most common form of cyanotic congenital heart disease. Cyanosis is the abnormal bluish discoloration of the skin that occurs because of low levels of circulating oxygen in the blood. Tetralogy of Fallot consists of the combination of four different heart defects: a ventricular septal defect (VSD); obstructed outflow of blood from the right ventricle to the lungs (pulmonary stenosis); a displaced aorta, which causes blood to flow into the aorta from both the right and left ventricles (dextroposition or overriding aorta); and abnormal enlargement of the right ventricle (right ventricular hypertrophy). The severity of the symptoms is related to the degree of blood flow obstruction from the right ventricle.
Introduction
The normal heart has four chambers. The two upper chambers known as atria are separated from each other by a fibrous partition known as the atrial septum. The two lower chambers are known as ventricles and are separated from each other by the ventricular septum. Valves connect the atria (left and right) to their respective ventricles. The valves allow for blood to be pumped through the chambers. Blood travels from the right ventricle through the pulmonary artery to the lungs where it receives oxygen. The blood returns to the heart through pulmonary veins and enters the left ventricle. The left ventricle sends the now oxygen-filled blood into the main artery of the body (aorta). The aorta sends the blood throughout the body.
Ventricular Septal Defect
The heart has an inner wall that separates the two chambers, called a septum. The septum stops mixing of the blood between the two sides. A ventricular septal defect is a hole in the septum that causes oxygen-rich blood (left ventricle) and the oxygen-poor blood (right ventricle) to mix.
Pulmonary Stenosis
This defect is the narrowing of the pulmonary valve, which flows oxygen poor blood into the pulmonary artery and from there the blood travels to the lungs to pick up oxygen. Pulmonary stenosis is when the pulmonary valve cannot open fully, making the heart work harder and results in a lack of blood reaching the lung.
Right Ventricular Hypertrophy
The muscle of the right ventricle is thicker due to the right side of the heart receiving excessive blood flow from the left side of the heart through the ventricular septal defect and working harder.
Overriding Aorta
In a normal heart, the aorta is attached to the left ventricle and allows oxygen-rich blood to flow throughout the body. In a tetralogy of Fallot heart, the aorta is located between both the left and the right ventricle. This causes oxygen-poor blood from the right ventricle to flow into the aorta instead of the pulmonary artery. If infants with tetralogy of Fallot are not treated, the symptoms usually become progressively more severe. Blood flow to the lungs may be further decreased and severe cyanosis may cause life-threatening complications. The exact cause of tetralogy of Fallot is not known.

symptoms:
The symptoms of tetralogy of Fallot vary widely from person to person. The severity of the symptoms, which may range from mild to severe, is related to the degree of blood flow obstruction from the right ventricle.
Tetralogy of Fallot may be present at birth or emerge within the first year of life. The most common symptom of this disorder is abnormal bluish discoloration of the skin (cyanosis). This may occur while the child is at rest or crying. The mucous membranes of the lips and mouth, fingertips, and toenails may be particularly blue due to the lack of oxygen. Affected infants may have difficulty breathing (dyspnea); as a result, they tend to play for short periods and then rest. Other symptoms may include a heart murmur, easy fatigability, poor appetite, slow weight gain, heart murmurs, an abnormal increase in the numbers of red blood cells (polycythemia), fingers and toes with wide, enlarged tips and overhanging nails (clubbing), and/or delayed physical growth.
Some infants with tetralogy of Fallot may experience episodes of severe cyanosis and breathing difficulty (paroxysmal hypercyanotic attack or “blue” or “tet” spells). During these episodes, the infant may become restless, extremely cyanotic while gasping for air and nonresponsive to parent’s voices. In extreme situations, infants may pass out. A characteristic squatting position may be assumed to help assist breathing. Severe attacks may lead to the loss consciousness, and occasionally to convulsions or temporary paralysis on one side of the body (hemiparesis). These spells may last for a few minutes to a few hours and may be followed by periods of muscle weakness and a prolonged period of sleep.
A variety of other complications may occur in association with tetralogy of Fallot. These may include mild anemia in infants, abnormal increase in the number of red blood cells (polycythemia) in older children, and blood clotting (coagulation) defects. These blood abnormalities may lead to the formation of blood clots that can travel through the blood stream (embolisms). These blood clots may cause the blood supply to the brain (cerebral infarctions) to be interrupted temporarily.Additional complications may include infectious inflammation of the sinuses (sinusitis) and brain abscesses. In some cases, the connection between the aorta and the pulmonary artery, which normally closes before birth, may remain open (patent ductus arteriosus). The symptoms associated with this condition vary depending upon the size of the opening and may include rapid breathing, frequent respiratory infections, and easy fatigability. Congestive heart failure is rare, except in association with bacterial infection of the heart (endocarditis) or abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias). However, a common sign is a heart murmur, or an extra sound heard while listening to the heartbeat.
The most severe form of tetralogy of Fallot is known as pseudotruncus arteriosus. Infants with this form of the disorder experience severe symptoms that relate to the profound obstruction of the right ventricular blood flow and severe underdevelopment of associated blood vessels and valves related to the lungs (pulmonary atresia). Ventricular septal defects are usually severe in this form of the disorder. Severe cyanosis, alarmingly low levels of circulating oxygen, and excessive circulating red blood cells (polycythemia) are the major features of pseudotruncus arteriosus. (For more information, see “Ventricular Septal Defect” in the Related Disorders section of this report.)

