Tetrahydrobiopterin Deficiency

synonyms:
BH4-deficient hyperphenylalaninemia

overview:
Summary
Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) deficiencies is a general term for a group of disorders characterized by abnormalities in the creation (biosynthesis) or regeneration of tetrahydrobiopterin, a naturally occurring compound that acts as a cofactor. A cofactor is a non-protein substance in the body that enhances or is necessary for the proper function of certain enzymes. When tetrahydrobiopterin is deficient, the chemical balance within the body is upset. In most of these disorders, there are abnormally high levels of the amino acid phenylalanine (hyperphenylalaninemia). Amino acids such as phenylalanine are chemical building blocks of proteins and are essential for proper growth and development. Most of these disorders also cause abnormally low levels of neurotransmitters. Neurotransmitters are chemicals that modify, amplify or transmit nerve impulses from one nerve cell to another, enabling nerve cells to communicate. These chemical imbalances can ultimately cause a wide variety of symptoms and physical findings including progressive neurological abnormalities, lack of muscle tone (hypotonia), overproduction of saliva (hypersalivation), loss of coordination, abnormal movements and/or delayed motor development. The specific symptoms can vary dramatically from one person to another and can range from mild to severe. Prompt diagnosis and treatment of these disorders can prevent potentially severe, irreversible neurological damage. Tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency is caused by changes (variants or mutations) in specific genes that encode enzymes required for the biosynthesis or regeneration of tetrahydrobiopterin. Most of these gene variants are inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.

Introduction
There are four main forms of tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency sometimes referred to as ‘classical’ tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency. They are guanosine triphosphate cyclohydrolase I (GTPCH) deficiency; 6-pyruvoyl tetrahydropterin synthase (PTPS) deficiency; pterin-4-alpha-carbinolamine dehydratase (PCD) deficiency and dihydropteridine reductase (DHPR) deficiency. The first two disorders are defects in tetrahydrobiopterin synthesis and the latter two are defects in tetrahydrobiopterin regeneration. Sepiapterin reductase deficiency is a related disorder affecting the third step of tetrahydrobiopterin biosynthesis; it differs from the other disorders in that elevated levels of phenylalanine do not develop. GTPCH deficiency can be broken down in the autosomal dominant form, also known as Segawa syndrome or autosomal dominant dopa-responsive dystonia, or the autosomal recessive form, which is covered in this report. NORD has separate, individual reports on sepiapterin reductase deficiency and Segawa syndrome.
In the past, disorders of tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency were referred to as atypical phenylketonuria or malignant phenylketonuria because physicians believed they were forms of phenylketonuria that did not respond to the standard therapy for that disorder. These terms are now considered obsolete because disorders of tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency are now known to be distinct disorders that are treatable with different therapies.

symptoms:
Although researchers have been able to establish distinct syndromes with characteristic or “core” symptoms, much about these disorders is not fully understood. Several factors including the small number of identified cases, the lack of large clinical studies and the possibility of other genes influencing the development and progression of these disorders prevent physicians from developing a complete picture of associated symptoms and prognosis.
Disorders of tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency can be classified as transient, mild or severe, which is extremely important in determining specifics of therapy, such as the need for neurotransmitter precursors during treatment (see Standard Therapies below). The specific symptoms and severity associated with tetrahydrobiopterin deficiencies can vary greatly from one person to another, even among individuals with the same subtype or among individuals from the same family. Overall, the symptoms of GTPCH deficiency, PTPS deficiency and DHPR deficiency are extremely similar. Generally, PCD deficiency is less severe than the other disorders and affected infants often only exhibit temporary abnormalities of muscle tone and delays in motor development. They are, however, at risk for developing type 2 diabetes (MODY) after the age of 9 years.
Tetrahydrobiopterin deficiencies usually present within the first six months of life and can be detected upon newborn screening because of elevated levels phenylalanine. Infants usually appear normal at birth, although some newborns, particularly in PTPS deficiency, may have a low birth weight. Failure to grow and gain weight (failure to thrive) may occur. Microcephaly, a condition defined as having a head circumference smaller than normally would be expected based on age and gender, is a common finding.
In the severe forms, common, but variable symptoms include neurological dysfunction including convulsions or seizures, swallowing difficulties, poor muscle tone of the trunk of the body (truncal hypotonia) and excess muscle tone of the arms and legs so that they may be stiff and difficult to move (limb hypertonia). Abnormal movements are common and can include abnormal slowness of movement (bradykinesia), rapid, involuntary, purposeless (chorea), slow, involuntary, writhing movements (athetosis), a type of spasm in which the head and feet bend the backward and the back arches (opisthotonus).
Affected children may also exhibit delays in reaching developmental milestones (developmental delays), delays in acquiring skills that require the coordination of mental and physical activities (psychomotor delay), and, in some children, intellectual disability.
Neurological dysfunction is progressive and, during the school years, affected individuals may appear uncoordinated or clumsy such as having an abnormal manner of walking (gait abnormalities). In some children, this clumsiness is due, in part, to involuntary muscle contractions that force the body into abnormal, sometimes painful, movements and positions (dystonia).
Some affected individuals may develop abnormal movements of the eyes that can range from brief upward rolling of the eyes to oculogyric crises, in which the eyes roll upward for a sustained period. Sometimes, the eyes may roll downward or move toward each other (converge). Severe oculogyric crises can be associated with additional symptoms including the formation of tears (lacrimation), eye blinking, widening (dilation) of the pupils, drooling, backward flexion of the neck, restlessness or a general feeling of poor health (malaise).
Additional symptoms that have been reported include excessive production of saliva, lethargy and irritability. Recurrent episodes of elevated body temperature (hyperthermia) that are not associated with infection may also occur. Certain symptoms may become noticeably worse or more pronounced in the afternoon and evening than in the morning (marked diurnal fluctuation). Swallowing difficulties and poor sucking ability in infants can result in poor feeding during infancy.

