Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura

synonyms:
microangiopathic hemolytic anemiaMoschowitz DiseaseTTP

overview:
Thrombotic thrombocytopenia purpura (TTP) is a rare, serious blood disease. Major symptoms may include a severe decrease in the number of blood platelets (thrombocytopenia), abnormal destruction of red blood cells (hemolytic anemia) and disturbances in the nervous system and other organs occur as a result of small clots that form in the smallest arteries. The exact cause of TTP is unknown.

symptoms:
The thrombocytopenia and hemolytic anemia are a result of these small clots in the blood vessels of many organs, potentially blocking the normal flow of blood through the vessels. Disturbances affecting the nervous system may include headaches, mental changes, confusion, speech abnormalities, slight or partial paralysis (paresis), seizures or coma.
Fever, blood plasma proteins in the urine (proteinuria), and a very small number of red blood cells in the urine (hematuria) may also occur. Affected individuals also exhibit red rash-like areas of skin or patches of purplish discoloration (purpura) resulting from abnormal bleeding into the mucous membranes (the thin, moist layer lining the body’s cavities) and into the skin that can be a sign of low platelets. Additional features of TTP can include abnormally heavy bleeding (hemorrhaging), weakness, fatigue, lack of color (pallor) and abdominal pain with nausea and vomiting. In half of individuals with TTP, increased levels of a chemical compound known as creatinine are found in the blood.
Acute renal failure requiring kidney dialysis occurs in only about 10 percent of individuals with TTP. Within days, swelling of the feet, shortness of breath, headache, and fever may occur. Retention of water and salt in the blood may lead to high blood pressure, changes in brain metabolism, and congestion in the heart and lungs. Acute renal failure may lead to a buildup (accumulation) of potassium in the blood (hyperkalemia), which may cause irregular heartbeat.
TTP can develop during pregnancy and there may be serious complications during pregnancy in females with TTP. In general, TTP often occurs suddenly with great severity and may recur in future pregnancies.

