Thymidine Kinase 2 Deficiency

synonyms:
TK2Dmitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome 2mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome 2 (myopathic type)MTDPS2mitochondrial DNA depletion myopathy - TK2-relatedTK2-related mitochondrial DNA maintenance defect, myopathic form

overview:
Summary

Thymidine kinase 2 deficiency (TK2D) was first described in 2001 in 4 children with severe muscle disease and as of 2022, there have been less than 120 patients described in the medical literature. All patients described have some degree of muscle weakness but the severity, age of onset and disease progression varies from person to person. The most common symptom is weakness of the arms and legs that gets worse over time. Breathing difficulties, weakness of the eye muscles and trouble chewing and swallowing are also common. The small number of patients and the recent discovery of TK2D make it difficult to predict the exact disease course in any given patient. TK2D is caused by genetic changes (mutations) in theTK2gene and inherited as an autosomal recessive genetic condition.

Introduction

TK2D is one of the primary mitochondrial myopathies (PMM). PMM are a group of mitochondrial disorders that present predominantly with muscle manifestations. Mitochondria are found by the hundreds within every cell of the body. Mitochondria regulate the production of cellular energy and carry their own unique DNA known as mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Mitochondrial disorders can be caused by changes in genes within the mitochondria (mtDNA) or in genes outside the mitochondria (nuclear DNA). These genetic changes affect the ability of cells to produce energy. PMM can involve multiple body systems, but primarily affect the skeletal muscles. For more information, choose “primary mitochondrial myopathies” as your search term in the Rare Disease Database.

symptoms:
The symptoms of TK2D vary in severity, age of onset and how quickly they progress. There are three main types of TK2D: the infantile-onset type, childhood-onset type and late-onset type.

Infantile-Onset
The first symptoms of infantile-onset TK2D typically begin before one year of age. Early development and growth are normal. The first signs of TK2D are usually low muscle tone (hypotonia) and muscle weakness of the arms and legs. Other early signs include feeding problems and difficulty breathing. Some patients with infantile-onset TK2D also have a brain disease known as encephalopathy. This can lead to developmental and cognitive problems, hearing loss and seizures.
The symptoms of infantile TK2D quickly get worse over time. Most children with this condition never walk or quickly lose the ability to walk. Because the muscles associated with breathing are affected, most children eventually require ventilator support. Death due to respiratory failure usually occurs a few years after the first symptoms occur.

Childhood-Onset
Symptoms of childhood-onset TK2D appear between the ages of 1 and 12 years. The first signs are typically muscle weakness of the arms and legs. The facial muscles are also often involved leading to facial paralysis and droopy eyelids (ptosis). The muscles of the eyeballs may also be affected, leading to difficulties in moving the eyeballs (progressive external ophthalmoparesis or PEO).
Childhood-onset TK2D is slowly progressive, and most children will need a wheelchair by age 10. The respiratory muscles become weak as well, and many children will require some type of ventilator to assist with breathing. Survival is variable, but many children die from respiratory failure in their teens.

Late-Onset
Symptoms of the late-onset type of TK2D begin after age 12. The muscles of the limbs become weak, particularly shoulders, arms, hips and thighs (proximal muscle weakness). One of the first symptoms may be weakness of the shoulder muscles causing the shoulder blade to stick out (scapular winging). Facial muscle weakness can cause droopy eyelids (ptosis) and weakness of the muscles that move the eye (progressive external ophthalmoplegia or PEO). Other symptoms include difficulty swallowing and talking.
Progression is different from person to person. Generally, the symptoms of late-onset TK2D get slowly worse over time. Most people do not lose the ability to walk, but often need some kind of assistance with mobility. The respiratory muscles are affected and become weak. Many people eventually need some type of ventilator support to help with breathing. Death usually occurs 20-30 years after the onset of symptoms and is usually due to respiratory failure.

