Thyroid Cancer

overview:
Thyroid cancer (carcinoma) is cancer affecting the thyroid gland, a butterfly-shaped structure located at the base of the neck. The thyroid is part of the endocrine system, the network of glands that secrete hormones.  Thyroid hormones regulate the chemical processes (metabolism) that influence the body’s activities as well as regulating the heart rate, body temperature, and blood pressure. Hormones are secreted directly into the bloodstream where they travel to various areas of the body.
In many people, there are no symptoms (asymptomatic) associated with thyroid cancer. Pain in the neck, hoarseness and swollen lymph nodes especially in the neck may be present in some people. Thyroid cancer is the most common form of cancer affecting the endocrine system. Most forms rarely cause pain or disability and are easily treated with surgery and follow-up therapy. However, some forms are aggressive and more difficult to treat.
The term “cancer” refers to a group of diseases characterized by abnormal, uncontrolled cellular growth that invades surrounding tissues and may spread (metastasize) to distant bodily tissues or organs via the bloodstream, the lymphatic system, or other means. Different forms of cancer, including thyroid cancer, may be classified based upon the cell type involved, the specific nature of the malignancy, and the disease’s clinical course. The four main types of thyroid cancer are papillary, follicular, medullary and anaplastic. Rare forms of thyroid cancer include thyroid teratoma, lymphoma, and squamous cell carcinoma.  Papillary cancer is by far the most common, comprising about 80% of all thyroid cancer.
Malignant cells pass their abnormal changes on to all their “daughter” cells and typically grow and divide at an unusually rapid, uncontrolled rate that cannot be contained by the body’s natural immune defenses. Eventually, such proliferation of abnormal cells may result in formation of a mass known as a tumor (neoplasm). Disease progression may be characterized by invasion of surrounding tissues, infiltration of regional lymph nodes, and spread of the malignancy via the bloodstream, the lymphatic circulation, or other means to other bodily tissues and organs.

symptoms:
The vast majority individuals with thyroid cancer have no symptoms (asymptomatic). In most cases, a small growth or lump (nodule), discovered by the patient, health care provider, or incidentally on an imaging study (e.g., a CT scan, MRI, or carotid artery ultrasound), is the first sign of thyroid cancer. Thyroid “nodules” or lumps in the thyroid may be caused by a variety of conditions and do not necessarily mean that an individual has cancer. In fact, more than 90 percent of thyroid nodules are not cancerous (benign).
Symptoms that may be associated with thyroid cancer include hoarseness, difficulty breathing or swallowing, swollen lymph nodes especially in the neck, and pain in the throat or neck.
Cancer can arise from any of the types of cells found in the thyroid gland. Approximately 90 percent of thyroid cancers arise from follicular cells (the cells that comprise most of the thyroid and make thyroid hormone).  Most of the remaining cases arise from C cells (parafollicular cells). Cancer arising from white blood cells (lymphocytes), known as lymphoma, may also occur. Extremely rare forms of thyroid cancer include squamous cell carcinoma and teratomas.
Thyroid cancer may also be classified as well-differentiated or poorly differentiated. Differentiation refers to how abnormal the cells look under a microscope, how rapidly they grow, and whether they retain the features of normal thyroid cells, such as the ability to trap iodine. Well-differentiated cancers are made of cells that retain the look of the cells from which they arose (e.g., thyroid follicular cells). More “poorly differentiated” or “undifferentiated” cancers are made of cells that have undergone transformation and revert to a less specialized, more primitive form. Therefore, they are no longer capable of performing their “intended”, specialized functions within the tissue in question.
Well-differentiated thyroid cancer usually refers to papillary or follicular forms of thyroid cancer. These forms of thyroid cancer are sometimes simply referred to as differentiated thyroid cancer or DTC. Insular thyroid carcinoma is referred to as poorly differentiated thyroid cancer. Anaplastic thyroid cancer is also known as undifferentiated thyroid cancer. Naturally, well-differentiated carcinomas have a better prognosis.
Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma (PTC)PTC is the most common form of thyroid cancer, accounting for approximately 80 percent of patients. PTC arises from the thyroid follicular cells. This form of thyroid cancer usually presents as a single lump in the thyroid and often progresses slowly. PTC has a propensity to spread (metastasize) via the lymph nodes and the lymphatic system, especially to local lymph nodes in the neck.
PTC can affect individuals of any age including children, but most often affects people between 30 and 50 years of age. Women are affected more often than men.
Variants of Papillary Thyroid CarcinomaThere are several subtypes or variants of PTC; common subtypes include follicular, tall cell, and diffuse sclerosing variants.  These names refer to what the thyroid cancers look like under the microscope.
The follicular variant of PTC, which is different from follicular thyroid carcinoma, is the most common subtype in the United States. The follicular variant is a slow growing form of cancer. The clinical behavior of this subtype is similar to PTC in general.
The tall cell variant (TCV) of PTC is a relatively rare form of thyroid cancer. TCV can be more aggressive than PTC in general, and has higher rates of recurrence than PTC. Most cases tend to occur in older individuals. TCV gets its name because the height of the characteristic cells is two to three times greater than the width. More than 70% of cancer cells for this tumor must be “tall” cells for a diagnosis of tall cell variant thyroid cancer. Tumor size is generally larger than the tumor size generally associated with PTC. Some researchers believe that TCV is underdiagnosed.
The diffuse sclerosing variant is more common in younger individuals, especially younger women. It often develops between the ages of 15-30. The first sign is often an enlarged thyroid (goiter). This subtype of PTC can spread to the lymph nodes or lungs. Recurrence is more likely with the diffuse sclerosing variant than with PTC.
Follicular Thyroid Carcinoma (FTC)Although FTC is the second most common form of thyroid cancer, it accounts for only approximately 10 percent of patients. As with papillary thyroid carcinoma, FTC also arises from thyroid follicular cells, but is far less likely to spread to the lymph nodes. It may spread to the lungs, brain, or bone. FTC is often classified as minimally invasive or widely invasive. FTC usually presents as a painless thyroid lump (nodule).
Most individuals with FTC are more than 50 years of age. Women are affected more often than men by greater than a 2-1 ratio.
Poorly differentiated (insular) thyroid carcinoma is a rare subtype of follicular thyroid carcinoma. It is extremely rare, but is aggressive and often spreads to the surrounding lymph nodes and other areas of the body, especially the lungs, bone or brain where it may cause life-threatening complications. This form of thyroid cancer also usually presents as a mass in the neck.
Poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma usually affects individuals 55 years old or older and affects women twice as often as men. While most of the medical literature classifies poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma as a form of follicular thyroid carcinoma, its cellular makeup may also be related to papillary thyroid carcinoma.
Hürthle Cell CarcinomaThe World Health Organization (WHO) classifies this form of thyroid cancer as a subtype of FTC, although recent research suggests that it is a distinct form of thyroid cancer. HCC accounts for approximately 3 percent of thyroid cancer. This form of thyroid cancer may affect any age group and usually occurs in individuals between 40-50 years of age. HCC affects women more often than men and is considered to have a worse prognosis than regular FTC. This form of thyroid cancer is also known as oncocytic thyroid carcinoma.
The first sign of Hürthle cell carcinoma is usually a painless lump in the neck. Hürthle cell carcinoma may spread to affect the bone, liver, or lung. Rare cases have been described that have spread to the adrenal glands and brain.
Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma (MTC)This type of thyroid cancer accounts for approximately 2-3 percent of thyroid cancer. MTC arises from “C cells” (also called parafollicular cells); this type of cell produces the hormone calcitonin (which is why they are called “C cells”).  Calcitonin helps to regulate calcium and sodium metabolism in animals, and may have effects to protect the skeleton from calcium loss in man. MTC is a more aggressive form of cancer than DTC, and may spread via the lymph nodes or bloodstream to affect other organs. The first sign of MTC is often a firm mass in the thyroid or abnormal enlargement of nearby lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy). In some cases, MTC may already have spread (metastasized) to other organs before a mass is detected.
Most people with MTC develop it randomly for no known reason (sporadic cases). However, about 30% of patients may have a type that runs in families (familial MTC or FMTC), affecting only the thyroid or as part of a rare disorder known as multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN Type 2).
Anaplastic (Undifferentiated) Thyroid Carcinoma (ATC)ATC accounts for approximately 5 percent of thyroid cancer and mostly affects individuals 70 years and older. ATC is highly aggressive and often spreads quickly to surrounding lymph nodes and organs especially the windpipe (trachea), lungs or bone. ATC may quickly result in life-threatening complications such as obstruction of the trachea or massive hemorrhaging. ATC often develops from an existing follicular or papillary cancer.
Thyroid LymphomaPrimary lymphoma of the thyroid does not arise from follicular or C cells, but instead arises from the immune system cells known as lymphocytes. Most lymphomas develop in the lymph nodes, but can occur in other organs such as the thyroid. Thyroid lymphoma is extremely rare accounting for less than 2 percent of thyroid cancers.
Thyroid lymphoma spreads rapidly and quickly replaces thyroid tissue. Thyroid lymphoma usually affects individuals more than 70 years old and affects women three times more often than men. It occurs most commonly in women who have a history of hypothyroidism due to autoimmune (Hashimoto’s) thyroiditis.

