Thyroid Eye Disease

synonyms:
Graves’ eye diseaseGraves’ ophthalmopathyGraves’ orbitopathyTED

overview:
SummaryThyroid eye disease (TED) is characterized by progressive inflammation and damage to tissues around the eyes, especially extraocular muscle, connective and fatty tissue. TED has an active disease phase in which progressive inflammation, swelling and tissue changes occur. This phase is associated with a variety of symptoms including pain, a gritty feeling in the eyes, swelling or abnormal positioning of the eyelids, watery eyes, bulging eyes (proptosis) and double vision (diplopia). The active phase can last anywhere from approximately 6 months to 2 years. This is followed by an inactive phase in which the disease progression has stopped. However, some symptoms such as double vision and bulging eyes can remain. In some people, cosmetic changes and significant disability can develop. Although uncommon, in severe instances, vision loss can occur. Thyroid eye disease is an autoimmune disorder. An autoimmune disorder is one in which the body’s adaptive immune system, which protects the body from infectious or other foreign substances, mistakenly attacks healthy tissue instead. Treatment includes reversing hyperthyroidism, specific medications, supportive measures and in some patients, surgery.
IntroductionThyroid eye disease most commonly occurs as part of Graves’ disease, which is an autoimmune disease that affects the thyroid and often the skin and eyes. The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland located at the base of the neck. The thyroid is part of the endocrine system, the network of glands that secrete hormones that regulate the chemical processes (metabolism) that influence the body’s activities as well as regulating the heart rate, body temperature and blood pressure. Graves’ disease is characterized by abnormal enlargement of the thyroid (goiter) and increased secretion of thyroid hormone (hyperthyroidism). Less often, thyroid eye disease can occur in people who have or have had an overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism) or in individuals with an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism) such as people who have a disorder called Hashimoto thyroiditis.
Although relatively infrequent, TED does not currently fulfill the main criterion for being defined as a rare disease, but several variants of the disease are considered rare diseases.

symptoms:
The signs and symptoms can vary greatly from one person to another. Eye symptoms can range from mild to severe. For some individuals, the symptoms can lead to pain, disfigurement of the eye socket and, eventually, potentially threaten eyesight. The disorder can vary greatly in expression. For some people, the disorder remains little changed for many years, while for others it will worsen or slightly improve. Occasionally people experience repeated episodes of worsening (exacerbations) of the disease, and improvement of the disease (remission).
Initial symptoms include redness, irritation and discomfort of the eyes and eyelids. Dry eyes and pain when moving the eyes may also occur. Eyelid retraction is also common which is when the upper eyelid is positioned too high and/or the lower eyelid too low thus exposing the eye. The most noticeable symptom can be exophthalmos or proptosis, which means that the eyes bulge or protrude outward out of the eye socket. Bulging of the eyes can cause a person to appear as if they are constantly ‘staring’.
Additional symptoms and signs can include blurred vision, double vision (diplopia), misalignment of the eyes (strabismus), chronic bloody eyes, white area of eye inflamed, constant, watery eyes due to the excess formation of tears, swelling near the upper and lower eyelids, an intolerance of bright lights and difficulty moving the eyeballs.
Progressive swelling can cause increased pressure within the eye socket and pain or headaches. In severe cases, additional symptoms can develop including corneal erosion, in which there is an eroded area on the clear (transparent) outer layer of the eye (cornea). In some, enlarged eye muscles can compress and cause damage to the optic nerve (optic neuropathy), which is the main nerve of the eye and carries nerve impulses to the brain. Corneal ulceration and optic neuropathy can, sometimes, progress to cause vision loss.
Thyroid eye disease is a progressive disorder in which progressive damage to various tissues around the eyes can lead to scarring (fibrosis) and tissue remodeling. The extent of scarring and tissue remodeling tends to become apparent during the inactive phase, after inflammation and swelling has subsided. This can change the appearance of the eyes and lead to affected individuals looking tired all the time, or to appear different from people without such changes. These cosmetic issues can have a significant impact on emotional well-being and quality of life.
There may be differences in symptoms in people from certain ethnic backgrounds. For example, Asian patients tend to present with less-pronounced proptosis and diffuse extraocular muscle involvement as well as a tendency for lower lid retraction rather than upper lid retraction.

