Timothy Syndrome

synonyms:
long QT syndrome type 8 (LQT8)TS

overview:
Summary
Timothy syndrome (TS), also referred to as long QT syndrome type 8 (LQT8), is a rare multisystem genetic disorder affecting the heart and several other organs, including the skeleton, metabolic system, and brain [1–3]. The most relevant heart manifestation of TS is the prolongation of the time required by the heart to complete a cycle of its electrical activity, known as the “QT interval”. TS belongs to a heterogeneous group of diseases collectively classified as “long QT syndrome” or LQTS. The QT interval prolongation predisposes patients to a high risk of developing cardiac arrhythmias and experiencing cardiac arrest from a very young age [4].
The main feature that distinguishes TS from other forms of LQTS is that it presents additional clinical manifestations, both heart (cardiac) and extra-cardiac. These include cardiac malformations, thickening of the cardiac walls (cardiac hypertrophy), fingers or toes that are fused together (syndactyly), facial differences, immunological defects, neurodevelopmental delay and episodes of low levels of sugar in the blood (hypoglycemia) [3]. The Timothy Syndrome Alliance states that with more cases being identified, gastrointestinal defects have become a major concern.
These multisystem abnormalities are the result of a genetic modification that affects multiple organs and tissues of the body. TS is caused by changes (mutations) in theCACNA1Cgene [3] that provides the instructions for the assembly of special proteins known as “calcium channels.” These channels are located on the external membrane of cells and allow calcium ions to flow into the cardiac cells. Since the calcium channels are present not only in the heart but in many other organs, multiple body systems are affected.
Available treatments include orally administrated medications (“antiarrhythmics”) and implantable devices like pacemakers (PM) or implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICD) [5].

symptoms:
Due to the multisystem nature of this disease, its clinical presentation is remarkably complex.
TS’s key cardiac feature is the documentation of a markedly prolonged QT interval on the electrocardiogram (EKG). The QT interval is the electrocardiographic parameter representing the time required for the heart to complete a cycle of contraction and relaxation. The prolongation of this interval predisposes the heart to develop sudden alterations in the cardiac rhythm (known as arrhythmias). These cardiac arrhythmias can be very rapid and can impair the heart’s ability to pump blood to the brain, ultimately resulting in a sudden loss of consciousness (syncope), cardiac arrest, and potentially sudden cardiac death. Anesthesia and hypoglycemia are well-recognized triggers for arrhythmias in patients with TS [6–8]. Furthermore, when the QT interval is exceptionally prolonged, as is the case in patients with TS, a slowing in the conduction of the electrical impulses from the atria to the ventricles can occur. This phenomenon is called “atrioventricular block” and can result in a severe reduction of the heart rate (bradycardia).
One of the most common and peculiar extra-cardiac signs of TS is the presence of syndactyly [2,9], a condition in which two or more digits are fused together. It can be bilateral and may involve both the hands and the feet. According to a recent research study [6], up to 20% of individuals with TS may not present with syndactyly. Therefore, genetic testing is crucial to establish the diagnosis of TS in these patients.Some visible signs associated with TS are specific facial differences in about 50% of patients [3,6], including low-set ears, a lower nasal bridge, a small upper jaw, baldness at birth and small and widely spaced teeth with a predisposition to cavities.
Additional extra-cardiac symptoms are a predisposition to infections (30-40% of patients [3,6]) secondary to an immunological defect and occasional episodes of low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), that may lead to fainting and, if untreated, death. Children with TS may also present with neurodevelopmental delay in up to 60% of patients [3,6]. The neurological features include autism spectrum disorders, seizures and intellectual disability.

