TLK2-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder

synonyms:
intellectual disability, autosomal dominant 57intellectual developmental disorder, autosomal dominant 57TLK2-related syndrome

overview:
Summary
TLK2-related neurodevelopmental disorder is a genetic disorder that primarily causes differences in development. There are also other medical problems in people with this disorder including growth, behavior, eye and gastrointestinal problems. This disorder is caused by genetic changes (disease-causing variants) in theTLK2gene. TLK2-related neurodevelopmental disorder has been reported to have variable expressivity, meaning there is a range of symptoms that can occur in people affected with this condition.
The average age of onset for many symptoms begins in childhood. Symptoms include developmental delay, intellectual disability, autism, speech and language delay, behavioral problems, facial differences, small head size (microcephaly), gastrointestinal problems (constipation and diarrhea) low weight and short height. Additional medical problems can include feeding difficulties, lazy eye (strabismus), vision loss, seizures (epilepsy), curvature of the spine (scoliosis) and joint hypermobility.
Introduction
TLK2-related neurodevelopmental disorder was first defined in 2018. As of 2024, 42 patients have been described in the medical literature.

symptoms:
People with TLK2-related neurodevelopmental disorder have a range of neurodevelopmental features and other symptoms. Neurodevelopmental features include developmental delay, intellectual disability, learning difficulties, autism, hyperactivity, inattention, anxiety, social difficulties and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Rarely, patients have normal intelligence. Other features can include small head size (microcephaly), seizures (epilepsy), weak muscles (hypotonia) and differences in brain structure or shape (brain malformations). Other symptoms include issues with the gastrointestinal system, including diarrhea, feeding difficulties in infancy and constipation. In terms of growth and bones, individuals with TLK2-related neurodevelopmental disorder can have low body weight, obesity, short stature, curvature in the spine (scoliosis), flat feet (pes planus), extremely flexible joints (hypermobility) and tightening of muscles or joints (contractures). Other medical problems can include recurrent ear infections (otitis media), lazy eye (strabismus), vision abnormalities and extra hair (hypertrichosis).
The most common facial features are a limited ability to open eyes widely (blepharophimosis), a broad tip to the nose, eyes that are set farther apart (hypertelorism), thin upper lip, eyes that slant upwards, extra skin fold near the inner eye (epicanthal folds), pointed chin, small or malformed ears and a long and/or asymmetric face.

