Tooth and Nail Syndrome

synonyms:
Witkop syndromeectodermal dysplasia 3, Wiktop typeectodermal dysplasia 3, tooth/nail typedysplasia of nails With hypodontianail dysgenesis and hypodontia

overview:
Summary
Tooth and nail syndrome (TNS, also known as Witkop syndrome) is a rare genetic condition that belongs to a group of conditions called ectodermal dysplasias. This group has more than 100 separate syndromes and is defined by two or more symptoms in the nails, teeth, hair and/or skin. TNS is characterized by missing and/or incorrect formation of certain baby teeth (primary teeth) and permanent/adult teeth (secondary teeth) and incorrect formation of the nails. The lower lip of individuals with TNS may stick outwards, like a pout. TNS is usually diagnosed at 4-5 years of age when tooth and nail symptoms are found.
Individuals who have TNS may have the following baby/adult teeth features: missing entirely, widely spaced, or shaped like cones (coniform). In addition, the nails in young children, especially the toenails, may be unusually small and underdeveloped (hypoplastic). They can have an obvious, unusual hollow shape, which appear to be spoon-shaped. They are slow-growing, thin and brittle. Nails are often more affected in childhood and can improve with age, so they may appear normal by adulthood. Individuals with TNS can have different numbers of teeth/nails affected, or various types of affected teeth. TNS is an autosomal dominant genetic condition.

symptoms:
TNS involves missing and/or the malformation of certain baby teeth (primary teeth) and permanent/adult teeth (secondary teeth). The number affected can range from 6 to 20 teeth. It also involves incorrect development of the nails. Rarely, affected individuals may also have changes affecting scalp hair, like thinning of the hair. Individuals with this condition usually have typical hair and sweat gland function. Symptoms are most obvious around school-age. TNS symptoms are less severe than other types of ectodermal dysplasia. Because of this, some people with TNS may be undiagnosed.
In some infants with TNS, certain primary teeth may be missing or unusual in shape and look like cones (coniform) or are pointed. In most children with the condition, several secondary (adult) teeth are also absent and/or not properly formed. The most common adult teeth missing include the lower front teeth (mandibular incisors and the teeth next to the incisors). The upper portions (crowns) of certain permanent teeth may be cone-shaped and, and in some people the teeth may be widely spaced. Many infants and children with the disorder appear to have a “pouting” or outwardly turned lower lip (everted). This is due to the missing primary and/or secondary teeth. The jaw can also appear small due to incorrect tooth development. Tooth alignment is also affected, with some teeth growing in incorrectly. There is no standard pattern of missing teeth, and it varies with each individual.
Individuals with TNS also have obvious differences in toenails and/or fingernails. The nails may be absent at birth and may grow very slowly. This typically occurs from infancy to around 2 to 3 years of age. In most individuals with TNS, the toenails are more affected than the fingernails. Sometimes the nails may appear normal in older children and adults, but toenails can continue to appear unusually small and/or spoon shaped. Nails can be rigid and break easily.
Some individuals with TNS have scalp hair that is abnormally thin, fine and brittle. The hair is usually spaced around the head normally.

