Transverse Myelitis

overview:
Summary
Transverse myelitis (TM) is a rare inflammatory disease-causing injury to the spinal cord with varying degrees of weakness, sensory alterations and autonomic dysfunction (the part of the nervous system that controls important involuntary functions such as the heart, blood pressure, bladder, the digestive system, sexual functions. etc.)
Introduction
The first cases of acute myelitis were described in 1882 and were attributed to vascular lesions and acute inflammatory events. In England between 1922 and 1923 more than 200 post-vaccinal cases were noted as complications of the smallpox and rabies vaccines. Later reports revealed that TM was post-infectious in nature, and agents including measles, rubella and mycoplasma were directly isolated from the patient’s spinal fluid. The term “acute transverse myelitis” was first used by an English neurologist in 1948 to describe a case of rapidly progressive paraparesis with a thoracic sensory level, occurring as a postinfectious complication of pneumonia. The Transverse Myelitis Consortium Working Group delineated diagnostic criteria for disease-associated TM and idiopathic TM along with a framework to differentiate TM from non-inflammatory myelopathies in 2002.

symptoms:
The spinal cord carries motor nerve fibers to the limbs and trunk and sensory fibers from the body back to the brain. Inflammation within the spinal cord interrupts these pathways and causes the typical presenting symptoms. TM generally presents with rapidly progressing muscle weakness or paralysis, beginning with the legs and potentially moving to the arms with varying degrees of severity. The arm involvement is dependent upon the level of spinal cord affected. Sensation to light touch is diminished below the level of spinal cord lesion in most individuals. Pain (ascertained as appreciation of pinprick by the neurologist) and temperature sensation are generally diminished and appreciation of vibration (as tested by a tuning fork) and joint position sense may also be decreased. Many patients report a tight banding or girdle-like sensation around the trunk and that area may be very sensitive to touch.
In most patients a sensory level is documented, most commonly in the mid-thoracic region in adults or the cervical region in children. Pain in the back (that might suggest where the inflammation is localized), extremities, or abdomen, as well as tingling, numbness, burning sensations are common. Increased urinary urgency, frequency, hesitancy to start voiding, interrupted urine stream, incomplete bladder emptying or inability to void, or urinary incontinence, as well as incomplete evacuation of bowel or constipation or bowel incontinence, are other characteristic autonomic symptoms. Spasticity and fatigue are other symptoms common to TM. Sexual dysfunction is also the result of sensory and autonomic involvement, but also may be contributed by depression that sometimes accompanies TM.
In some patients, symptoms progress over hours whereas in other instances, the presentation is over days. Neurologic function tends to decline during the 4h-21-day acute phase, while eighty percent of patients reach their maximal deficit within 10 days of symptom onset. At its worst point, 50% of individuals have lost all movements of their legs, 80-94% experience numbness, tingling or pain, the feeling of “banding or girdling”, and almost all have some degree of bladder dysfunction.
Recovery from TM may be absent, partial or complete and generally begins within 1 to 3 months after acute treatment. Significant recovery is unlikely if no improvement occurs by 3 months. After the initial attack, approximately 1/3 of individuals recover with little or only minor symptoms, 1/3 are left with a moderate degree of permanent disability and 1/3 have virtually no recovery and are left severely functionally disabled. Most show good to fair recovery. The rapid progression of clinical symptoms, the presence of back pain, and the presence of spinal shock, as well as para-clinical evidence, such as absent central motor conduction response on evoked potential testing and the presence of elevated 14-3-3 protein in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) during the acute phase, might be indicators of a less complete recovery. It is important to know that the neurological outcome in patients with TM cannot be predicted based on imaging findings.
TM usually occurs only once, but in a subset of patients TM can be recurrent. Recurrence can often be predicted at the initial acute onset based on multifocal lesions in the spinal cord, lesions in the brain, presence of an underlying mixed connective tissue disease, the presence of oligoclonal bands in the CSF, and/or NMO-IgG, as well as persistence of MOG-IgG antibodies over time.

