Tricho Dento Osseous Syndrome

synonyms:
TDO Syndromeenamel hypoplasia and hypomineralization  with associated strikingly curly hair

overview:
Summary
Tricho-dento-osseous (TDO) syndrome is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder that belongs to a group of diseases known as ectodermal dysplasias. Ectodermal dysplasias typically affect the hair, teeth, nails and/or skin. TDO syndrome may be apparent at birth due to kinky curly hair that is present in all affected newborns with hair. TDO syndrome is characterized by kinky or curly hair; poorly developed tooth enamel; and unusual thickness and/or denseness (sclerosis) of the top portion of the skull (calvaria), long bones (i.e., bones in the arms and legs), jaw and spine. These skeletal abnormalities can be seen in children as young as three years of age but are more noticeable with increasing age. Some affected children also have abnormally thin, brittle nails. Most affected children have a relatively normal head shape, but some may have some variation in head shape. The treatment of TDO syndrome is directed toward the specific symptoms that are apparent in each individual.

symptoms:
TDO syndrome is characterized by abnormalities of the hair, teeth, bones and/or nails. In addition, infants and children with TDO syndrome have tight, kinky or curly hair that may also be unusually dry. Hair can straighten in childhood even by four years of age. The hair tends to remain unruly and wavy even after straightening from small tight curls.  Some individuals with the disorder also have unusually long eyelashes and eyebrows.
All individuals with TDO syndrome have dental abnormalities that affect both the primary (deciduous) and secondary (permanent) teeth, but the range of severity is extremely variable. The tooth enamel is underdeveloped (enamel hypoplasia), with diminished mineral accumulation (hypomineralization). As a result, the tooth enamel may be abnormally thin, soft and pitted and often discolored (i.e., yellowish-brown). Hypersensitivity of the teeth is commonly reported. Both the primary and secondary molars may be abnormally shaped (i.e., “prism” shaped) and the chambers within the teeth that contain pulp may be abnormally large (taurodontism). In addition, many teeth may also have unusually short, open roots. As a result, the teeth may be highly prone to decay (dental caries) and infection (abscess) that may cause swelling and pain. Some affected individuals also exhibit widely spaced teeth; decreased tooth width (microdontia); premature (precocious) or delayed tooth eruption and secondary teeth that become impacted in the gums. Affected individuals may lose their teeth early, typically in the second or third decade of life.
Some individuals with TDO syndrome also have abnormalities of the nails. Fingernails and/or toenails may be unusually thin and brittle. In addition, the upper (superficial) layers of the nail may be prone to splitting.
Other reported abnormalities include impacted teeth and curvature of fingers (clinodactyly).

