Trichorhinophalangeal Syndrome Type I

synonyms:
TRPS1TRP syndrometrichorhinophalangeal dysplasia type ITRPS Itrichorhinophalangeal dysplasia types 1/3

overview:
Summary
Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type I (TRPS1) is a very rare genetic disorder that affects many organs of the body.
TRPS1 is characterized by thin, sparse scalp hair, unusual facial features with a distinctive nose shape abnormalities of the fingers and/or toes with abnormal nails and multiple abnormalities of the “growing ends” (epiphyses) of the bones (skeletal dysplasia), especially in the hands and feet.
Characteristic facial features may include a rounded (bulbous) “pear-shaped” nose, thick and broad eyebrows near the middle, an abnormally small jaw (micrognathia), a long area between the nose and upper lip, a thin upper lip, dental anomalies and/or unusually large (prominent) ears. In most people, the fingers and/or toes may be abnormally short (brachydactyly) and curved. In addition, affected individuals may have short stature. The range and severity of symptoms may vary from person to person.
TRP1 is caused by changes (variants) in theTRPS1gene. Inheritance is autosomal dominant.
There is no cure for TRPS1 but symptoms can be managed with supportive care.
Introduction
The term trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type 3 (TRPS3) was used to describe individuals with severe short stature and brachydactyly (short fingers and toes). However, this term is no longer in use. What was previously referred to as TRPS3 is now considered to be part of the broader spectrum of TRPS1.
In 2023, the classification of genetic skeletal disorders was updated. These updates help to clarify the classification of these related conditions and provide a more accurate understanding of the genetic basis behind them. According to the new guidelines:
TRPS caused by a pathogenic variant in theTRPS1gene is now referred to as trichorhinophalangeal dysplasia (syndrome) types 1/3. This covers what was previously known as TRPS1 and TRPS3.TRPS caused by a larger deletion in chromosome 8 (specifically affecting the region 8q23.3-q24.11, which includes theTRPS1andEXT1genes is referred to as Langer-Giedion syndrome (TRPS2).

symptoms:
TRPS1 is a condition that affects several parts of the body, particularly the bones, joints, face, skin, hair, teeth, sweat glands and nails. The name of the condition provides clues about the areas commonly impacted:
Tricho-refers to the hairRhino-refers to the nosePhalangealrefers to the fingers and toes
TRPS1 can vary greatly in how it affects different people, even among members of the same family. The severity of symptoms can differ widely from one individual to another and may include:
Bone and joint problems: People with TRPS1 often have various bone and joint problems including:Abnormal cone-shape of the bones in the fingers or toes, particularly at the endsFingernails and toenails are usually thin and may look unusual or abnormally formedShort feetHip dysplasia, a condition where the hip joints are not aligned properly, often developing in early adulthood but sometimes occurring in infancy or childhoodVery flexible (hypermobile) joints in children, but as they age, these joints may wear down, leading to pain and making movement more difficultDistinctive facial features, including:
Thick eyebrowsBroad nose with a rounded tipLarge, protruding earsA long, smooth area between the nose and upper lip (philtrum)A thin upper lipSmall teeth, which can either be fewer in number (oligodontia) or, in some people, more than usual (supernumerary)
Sparse scalp hair, especially noticeable in males who may experience significant hair loss, becoming almost or completely bald soon after pubertyLoose skin in younger people that tends to tighten as they grow olderExcessive sweat (hyperhidrosis)Growth delays, both before and after birth, which means they might be smaller or shorter than expected for their age.
As time passes, certain features of TRPS1 may become more noticeable:
Growth delaymay continue, making it more apparent that a child is smaller or shorter than their peers.Hair lossmight increase, and dental overcrowding (teeth that are too close together) may become more obvious, making facial features stand out more.Brachydactyly(short fingers) becomes more visible over time. In childhood, the fingers may start to bend or deviate due to abnormal bone growth at the ends of the fingers, and this can continue into adulthood.
X-rays typically reveal joint dysplasia (abnormal joint development), reduced space in the joints and areas of hard or dense bone (sclerotic bone). Problems with mobility in the lower limbs, especially in the hips, often develop as a person ages. In some people, these hip problems are so severe that a hip replacement may be necessary in early adulthood.
A more severe form of TRPS1, previously referred to as TRPS3, describes individuals who have more pronounced facial features, shorter stature and more noticeable brachydactyly.

